Sir William Blackstone, “Of the Absolute Rights of
Individuals” (1766)
The objects of the laws of England are so very
numerous and extensive, that, in order to consider
them with any tolerable ease and perspicuity, it will be
necessary to distribute them methodically under proper
and distinct heads; avoiding as much as possible
divisions too large and comprehensive on the one
hand, and too trifling and minute on the other; both of
which are equally productive of confusion.
Now, as municipal law is a rule of civil conduct,
commanding what is right, and prohibiting what is
wrong; or as Cicero,(a) and after him our Bracton,(b)
have expressed it, sanctio justa, jubens honesta et prohibens
contraria, it follows that the primary and principal object
of the law are rights and wrongs. In the prosecution,
therefore, of these commentaries, I shall follow this
very simple and obvious division; and shall, in the first
place, consider the rights that are commanded, and
secondly the wrongs that are forbidden, by the laws of
England.
Rights are, however, liable to another subdivision;
being either, first, those which concern and are
annexed to the persons of men, and are then called jura
personarum, or the rights of persons; or they are, secondly,
such as a man may acquire over external objects, or
things unconnected with his person, which are styled
jura rerum, or the rights of things. Wrongs also are divisible
into, first, private wrongs, which, being an infringement
merely of particular rights, concern individuals only,
and are called civil injuries; and, secondly, public wrongs,
which, being a breach of general and public rights,
affect the whole community, and are called crimes and
misdemesnors.
The objects of the laws of England falling into this
fourfold division, the present commentaries will
therefore consist of the four following parts: 1. The
rights of persons, with the means whereby such rights
may be either acquired or lost. 2. The rights of things,
with the means also of acquiring or losing them. 3.
Private wrongs, or civil injuries, with the means of
redressing them by law. 4. Public wrongs, or crimes and
misdemesnors, with the means of prevention and
punishment.
We are now first to consider the rights of persons,
with the means of acquiring and losing them.
Now the rights of persons that are commanded to
be observed by the municipal law are of two sorts: first,
such as are due from every citizen, which are usually
called civil duties; and, secondly, such as belong to him,
which is the more popular acceptation of rights or jura.
Both may indeed be comprised in this latter division;
for, as all social duties are of a relative nature, at the
same time that they are due from one man, or set of
men, they must also be due to another. But I apprehend
it will be more clear and easy to consider many of
them as duties required from, rather than as rights
belonging to, particular persons. Thus, for instance,
allegiance is usually, and therefore most easily,
considered as the duty of the people, and protection as
the duty of the magistrate; and yet they are reciprocally
the rights as well as duties of each other. Allegiance is
the right of the magistrate, and protection the right of
the people.
“Now the rights of persons that are
commanded to be observed by the
municipal law are of two sorts: first,
such as are due from every citizen,
which are usually called civil duties;
and, secondly, such as belong to him,
which is the more popular acceptation
of rights or jura.”
Persons also are divided by the law into either
natural persons, or artificial. Natural persons are such
as the God of nature formed us; artificial are such as
are created and devised by human laws for the
purposes of society and government, which are called
corporations or bodies politic.
The rights of persons considered in their natural
capacities are also of two sorts, absolute and relative.
3
1 Sir William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England in Four Books. Notes selected from the editions of Archibold, Christian, Coleridge,
Chitty, Stewart, Kerr, and others, Barron Field’s Analysis, and Additional Notes, and a Life of the Author by George Sharswood. In Two Volumes.
(Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Co., 1893). Vol. 1, Book I, Chap. 1 "Of the Absolute Rights of Individuals." <http://
oll.libertyfund.org/title/2140/198653>
Absolute, which are such as appertain and belong to
particular men, merely as individuals or single persons:
relative, which are incident to them as members of
society, and standing in various relations to each other.
The first, that is, absolute rights, will be the subject of
the present chapter.
“Let a man therefore be ever so
abandoned in his principles, or vicious
in his practice, provided he keeps his
wickedness to himself, and does not
offend against the rules of public
decency, he is out of the reach of
human laws.”
By the absolute rights of individuals, we mean those
which are so in their primary and strictest sense; such
as would belong to their persons merely in a state of
nature, and which every man is entitled to enjoy,
whether out of society or in it. But with regard to the
absolute duties, which man is bound to perform
considered as a mere individual, it is not to be expected
that any human municipal law should at all explain or
enforce them. For the end and intent of such laws
being only to regulate the behaviour of mankind, as
they are members of society, and stand in various
relations to each other, they have consequently no
concern with any other but social or relative duties. Let
a man therefore be ever so abandoned in his principles,
or vicious in his practice, provided he keeps his
wickedness to himself, and does not offend against the
rules of public decency, he is out of the reach of
human laws. But if he makes his vices public, though
they be such as seem principally to affect himself, (as
drunkenness, or the like,) then they become, by the bad
example they set, of pernicious effects to society; and
therefore it is then the business of human laws to
correct them. Here the circumstance of publication is
what alters the nature of the case. Public sobriety is a
relative duty, and therefore enjoined by our laws; private
sobriety is an absolute duty, which, whether it be
performed or not, human tribunals can never know;
and therefore they can never enforce it by any civil
sanction. But, with respect to rights, the case is different
Human laws define and enforce as well those rights
which belong to a man considered as an individual, as
those which belong to him considered as related to
others.
For the principal aim of society is to protect
individuals in the enjoyment of those absolute rights,
which were vested in them by the immutable laws of
nature, but which could not be preserved in peace
without that mutual assistance and intercourse which is
gained by the institution of friendly and social
communities. Hence it follows, that the first and
primary end of human laws is to maintain and regulate
these absolute rights of individuals. Such rights as are
social and relative result from, and are posterior to, the
formation of states and societies: so that to maintain
and regulate these is clearly a subsequent
consideration. And, therefore, the principal view of
human laws is, or ought always to be, to explain,
protect, and enforce such rights as are absolute, which
in themselves are few and simple: and then such rights
as are relative, which, arising from a variety of
connections, will be far more numerous and more
complicated. These will take up a greater space in any
code of laws, and hence may appear to be more
attended to—though in reality they are not—than the
rights of the former kind. Let us therefore proceed to
examine how far all laws ought, and how far the laws
of England actually do, take notice of these absolute
rights, and provide for their lasting security.
The absolute rights of man, considered as a free
agent, endowed with discernment to know good from
evil, and with power of choosing those measures which
appear to him to be most desirable, are usually
summed up in one general appellation, and
denominated the natural liberty of mankind. This
natural liberty consists properly in a power of acting as
one thinks fit, without any restraint or control, unless
by the law of nature; being a right inherent in us by
birth, and one of the gifts of God to man at his
creation, when he endued him with the faculty of free
will. But every man, when he enters into society, gives
up a part of his natural liberty, as the price of so
valuable a purchase; and, in consideration of receiving
the advantages of mutual commerce, obligos himself to
conform to those laws, which the community has
thought proper to establish. And this species of legal
obedience and conformity is infinitely more desirable
than that wild and savage liberty which is sacrificed to
obtain it. For no man that considers a moment would
wish to retain the absolute and uncontrolled power of
4
doing whatever he pleases: the consequence of which
is, that every other man would also have the same
power, and then there would be no security to
individuals in any of the enjoyments of life. Political,
therefore, or civil liberty, which is that of a member of
society, is no other than natural liberty so far restrained
by human laws (and no farther) as is necessary and
expedient for the general advantage of the public.(c)
Hence we may collect that the law, which restrains a
man from doing mischief to his fellow-citizens, though
it diminishes the natural, increases the civil liberty of
mankind; but that every wanton and causeless restraint
of the will of the subject, whether practised by a
monarch, a nobility, or a popular assembly, is a degree
of tyranny: nay, that even laws themselves, whether
made with or without our consent, if they regulate and
constrain our conduct in matters of more indifference,
without any good end in view, are regulations
destructive of liberty: whereas, if any public advantage
can arise from observing such precepts, the control of
our private inclinations, in one or two particular points,
will conduce to preserve our general freedom in others
of more importance; by supporting that state of society,
which alone can secure our independence. Thus the
statute of king Edward IV.,(d) which forbade the fine
gentlemen of those times (under the degree of a lord)
to wear pikes upon their shoes or boots of more than
two inches in length, was a law that savoured of
oppression; because, however ridiculous the fashion
then in use might appear, the restraining it by
pecuniary penalties could serve no purpose of common
utility. But the statute of king Charles II.,(e) which
prescribes a thing seemingly as indifferent, (a dress for
the dead, who are all ordered to be buried in woollen,)
is a law consistent with public liberty; for it encourages
the staple trade, on which in great measure depends
the universal good of the nation. So that laws, when
prudently framed, are by no means subversive, but
rather introductive, of liberty; for, as Mr. Locke has
well observed,(f) where there is no law there is no
freedom. But then, on the other hand, that constitution
or frame of government, that system of laws, is alone
calculated to maintain civil liberty, which leaves the
subject entire master of his own conduct, except in
those points wherein the public good requires some
direction or restraint.
The idea and practice of this political or civil
liberty flourish in their highest vigour in these
kingdoms, where it falls little short of perfection, and
can only be lost or destroyed by the folly or demerits of
its owner: the legislature, and of course the laws of
England, being peculiarly adapted to the preservation
of this inestimable blessing even in the meanest subject.
Very different from the modern constitutions of other
states, on the continent of Europe, and from the genius
of the imperial law; which in general are calculated to
vest an arbitrary and despotic power, of controlling the
actions of the subject, in the prince, or in a few
grandees. And this spirit of liberty is so deeply
implanted in our constitution, and rooted even in our
very soil, that a slave or a negro, the moment he lands
in England, falls under the protection of the laws, and
so far becomes a freeman;(g) though the master’s right
to his service may possibly still continue.
“This spirit of liberty is so deeply
implanted in our constitution, and
rooted even in our very soil, that a
slave or a negro, the moment he lands
in England, falls under the protection of
the laws, and so far becomes a
freeman; though the master’s right to
his service may possibly still
continue.”
The absolute rights of every Englishman, (which,
taken in a political and extensive sense, are usually
called their liberties,) as they are founded on nature
and reason, so they are coeval with our form of
government; though subject at times to fluctuate and
change: their establishment (excellent as it is) being still
human. At some times we have seen them depressed by
overbearing and tyrannical princes; at others so
luxuriant as even to tend to anarchy, a worse state than
tyranny itself, as any government is better than none at
all. But the vigour of our free constitution has always
delivered the nation from these embarrassments: and,
as soon as the convulsions consequent on the struggle
have been over, the balance of our rights and liberties
has settled to its proper level; and their fundamental
articles have been from time to time asserted in
5
parliament, as often as they were thought to be in
danger.
First, by the great charter of liberties, which was
obtained, sword in hand, from king John, and
afterwards, with some alterations, confirmed in
parliament by king Henry the Third, his son. Which
charter contained very few new grants; but, as Sir
Edward Coke(h) observes, was for the most part
declaratory of the principal grounds of the
fundamental laws of England. Afterwards by the
statute called confirmatio cartarum,(i) whereby the great
charter is directed to be allowed as the common law; all
judgments contrary to it are declared void; copies of it
are ordered to be sent to all cathedral churches, and
read twice a year to the people; and sentence of
excommunication is directed to be as constantly
denounced against all those that, by word, deed, or
counsel, act contrary thereto, or in any degree infringe
it. Next, by a multitude of subsequent corroborating
statutes, (Sir Edward Coke, I think, reckons thirty-two,)
(k) from the first Edward to Henry the Fourth. Then,
after a long interval, by the petition of right; which was a
parliamentary declaration of the liberties of the
people, assented to by king Charles the First in the
beginning of his reign: which was closely followed by
the still more ample concessions made by that unhappy
prince to his parliament before the fatal rupture
between them; and by the many salutary laws,
particularly the habeas corpus act, passed under Charles
the Second. To these succeeded the bill of rights, or
declaration delivered by the lords and commons to the
Prince and Princess of Orange, 13th of February,
1688; and afterwards enacted in parliament, when they
became king and queen; which declaration concludes
in these remarkable words:—“and they do claim,
demand, and insist upon, all and singular the premises,
as their undoubted rights and liberties.” And the act of
parliament itself(l) recognises “all and singular the
rights and liberties asserted and claimed in the said
declaration to be the true, ancient, and indubitable
rights of the people of this kingdom.” Lastly, these
liberties were again asserted at the commencement of
the present century, in the act of settlement,(m) whereby
the crown was limited to his present majesty’s
illustrious house: and some new provisions were added,
at the same fortunate era, for better securing our
religion, laws, and liberties; which the statute declares
to be “the birthright of the people of England,”
according to the ancient doctrine of the common law.
(n)
“The rights of the people of England ...
may be reduced to three principal or
primary articles; the right of personal
security, the right of personal liberty,
and the right of private property”
Thus much for the declaration of our rights and
liberties. The rights themselves, thus defined by these
several statutes, consist in a number of private
immunities; which will appear, from what has been
premised, to be indeed no other, than either that
residuum of natural liberty, which is not required by the
laws of society to be sacrificed to public convenience;
or else those civil privileges, which society hath
engaged to provide, in lieu of the natural liberties so
given up by individuals. These, therefore, were
formerly, either by inheritance or purchase, the rights
of all mankind; but, in most other countries of the
world being now more or less debased and destroyed,
they at present may be said to remain, in a peculiar
and emphatical manner, the rights of the people of
England. And these may be reduced to three principal
or primary articles; the right of personal security, the
right of personal liberty, and the right of private
property: because, as there is no other known method
of compulsion, or abridging man’s natural free will, but
by an infringement or diminution of one or other of
these important rights, the preservation of these,
inviolate, may justly be said to include the preservation
of our civil immunities in their largest and most
extensive sense.
“The right of personal security consists
in a person’s legal and uninterrupted
enjoyment of his life, his limbs, his
body, his health, and his reputation.”
I. The right of personal security consists in a
person’s legal and uninterrupted enjoyment of his life,
his limbs, his body, his health, and his reputation.
6
1. Life is the immediate gift of God, a right
inherent by nature in every individual; and it begins in
contemplation of law as soon as an infant is able to stir
in the mother’s womb. For if a woman is quick with
child, and by a potion or otherwise, killeth it in her
womb; or if any one beat her, whereby the child dieth
in her body, and she is delivered of a dead child; this,
though not murder, was by the ancient law homicide or
manslaughter.(o) But the modern law doth not look
upon this offence in quite so atrocious a light, but
merely as a heinous misdemesnor.(p)
An infant in ventre sa mere, or in the mother’s womb,
is supposed in law to be born for many purposes. It is
capable of having a legacy, or a surrender of a
copyhold estate, made to it. It may have a guardian
assigned to it;(q) and it is enabled to have an estate
limited to its use, and to take afterwards by such
limitation, as if it were then actually born.(r) And in
this point the civil law agrees with ours.(s)
2. A man’s limbs (by which for the present we only
understand those members which may be useful to him
in fight, and the loss of which alone amounts to
mayhem by the common law) are also the gift of the
wise Creator, to enable him to protect himself from
external injuries in a state of nature. To these therefore
he has a natural inherent right; and they cannot be
wantonly destroyed or disabled without a manifest
breach of civil liberty.
Both the life and limbs of a man are of such high
value, in the estimation of the law of England, that it
pardons even homicide if committed se defendendo, or in
order to preserve them. For whatever is done by a man
to save either life or member, is looked upon as done
upon the highest necessity and compulsion. Therefore,
if a man through fear of death or mayhem is prevailed
upon to execute a deed, or do any other legal act;
these, though accompanied with all other the requisite
solemnities, may be afterwards avoided, if forced upon
him by a well-grounded apprehension of losing his life,
or even his limbs, in case of his non-compliance.(t) And
the same is also a sufficient excuse for the commission
of many misdemesnors, as will appear in the fourth
book. The constraint a man is under in these
circumstances is called in law duress, from the Latin
durities, of which there are two sorts: duress of
imprisonment, where a man actually loses his liberty, of
which we shall presently speak; and duress per minas,
where the hardship is only threatened and impending,
which is that we are now discoursing of. Duress per
minas is either for fear of loss of life, or else for fear of
mayhem, or loss of limb. And this fear must be upon
sufficient reason; “non,” as Bracton expresses it, “suspicio
cujuslibet vani et meticulosi hominis, sed talis qui possit cadere in
virum constantem; talis enim debet esse metus, qui in se contineat
vitæ periculum, aut corporis cruciatum.”(u) A fear of battery,
or being beaten, though never so well grounded, is no
duress; neither is the fear of having one’s house
burned, or one’s goods taken away and destroyed,
because in these cases, should the threat be performed,
a man may have satisfaction by recovering equivalent
damages:(x) but no suitable atonement can be made for
the loss of life or limb. And the indulgence shown to a
man under this, the principal, sort of duress, the fear of
losing his life or limbs, agrees also with that maxim of
the civil law; ignoscitur ei qui sanguinem suum qualiter
redemptum voluit.
The law not only regards life and member, and
protects every man in the enjoyment of them, but also
furnishes him with every thing necessary for their
support. For there is no man so indigent or wretched,
but he may demand a supply sufficient for all the
necessities of life from the more opulent part of the
community, by means of the several statutes enacted
for the relief of the poor, of which in their proper
places. A humane provision; yet, though dictated by the
principles of society, discountenanced by the Roman
laws. For the edicts of the Emperor Constantine,
commanding the public to maintain the children of
those who were unable to provide for them, in order to
prevent the murder and exposure of infants, an
institution founded on the same principle as our
foundling hospitals, though comprised in the
Theodosian code,(y) were rejected in Justinian’s
collection.
These rights of life and member, can only be
determined by the death of the person; which was
formerly accounted to be either a civil or natural death.
The civil death commenced, if any man was banished
or abjured the realm(z) by the process of the common
law, or entered into religion; that is, went into a
monastery, and became there a monk professed: in
which cases he was absolutely dead in law, and his next
heir should have his estate. For such banished man was
entirely cut off from society; and such a monk, upon
his profession, renounced solemnly all secular
concerns: and besides, as the popish clergy claimed an
exemption from the duties of civil life and the
commands of the temporal magistrate, the genius of
7
the English laws would not suffer those persons to
enjoy the benefits of society, who secluded themselves
from it, and refused to submit to its regulations.(a) A
monk was therefore counted civiliter mortuus, and when
he entered into religion might, like other dying men,
make his testament and executors; or if he made none,
the ordinary might grant administration to his next of
kin, as if he were actually dead intestate. And such
executors and administrators had the same power, and
might bring the same actions for debts due to the
religious, and were liable to the same actions for those
due from him, as if he were naturally deceased.(b) Nay,
so far has this principle been carried, that when one
was bound in a bond to an abbot and his successors,
and afterwards made his executors, and professed
himself a monk of the same abbey, and in process of
time was himself made abbot thereof; here the law
gave him, in the capacity of abbot, an action of debt
against his own executors to recover the money due.(c)
In short, a monk or religious was so effectually dead in
law, that a lease made even to a third person, during
the life (generally) of one who afterwards became a
monk, determined by such his entry into religion; for
which reason leases, and other conveyances for life,
were usually made to have and to hold for the term of
one’s natural life.(d) But, even in the times of popery, the
law of England took no cognizance of profession in any
foreign country, because the fact could not be tried in
our courts;(e) and therefore, since the Reformation, this
disability is held to be abolished:(f) as is also the
disability of banishment, consequent upon abjuration,
by statute 21 Jac. I. c. 28.
“This natural life, being, as was before
observed, the immediate donation of
the great Creator, cannot legally be
disposed of or destroyed by any
individual, neither by the person
himself, nor by any other of his fellowcreatures, merely upon their own
authority.”
This natural life, being, as was before observed, the
immediate donation of the great Creator, cannot
legally be disposed of or destroyed by any individual,
neither by the person himself, nor by any other of his
fellow-creatures, merely upon their own authority. Yet
nevertheless it may, by the divine permission, be
frequently forfeited for the breach of those laws of
society, which are enforced by the sanction of capital
punishments; of the nature, restrictions, expedience,
and legality of which, we may hereafter more
conveniently inquire in the concluding book of these
commentaries. At present, I shall only observe, that
whenever the constitution of a state vests in any man, or
body of men, a power of destroying at pleasure
without the direction of laws, the lives or members of
the subject, such constitution is in the highest degree
tyrannical; and that, whenever any laws direct such
destruction for light and trivial causes, such laws are
likewise tyrannical, though in an inferior degree;
because here the subject is aware of the danger he is
exposed to, and may, by prudent caution, provide
against it. The statute law of England does therefore
very seldom, and the common law does never, inflict
any punishment extending to life or limb, unless upon
the highest necessity; and the constitution is an utter
stranger to any arbitrary power of killing or maiming
the subject without the express warrant of law. “Nullus
liber homo,” says the great charter,(g) “aliquo modo
destruatur, nisi per legale judicium parium suorum aut per legem
terræ.” Which words, “aliquo modo destruatur,” according
to Sir Edward Coke,(h) include a prohibition, not only
of killing and maiming, but also of torturing, (to which our
laws are strangers,) and of every oppression by colour
of an illegal authority. And it is enacted by the statute
of 5 Edw. III. c. 9, that no man shall be forejudged of
life or limb contrary to the great charter and the law of
the land; and again, by statute 28 Edw. III. c. 3, that no
man shall be put to death, without being brought to
answer by due process of law.
3. Besides those limbs and members that may be
necessary to a man in order to defend himself or annoy
his enemy, the rest of his person or body is also
entitled, by the same natural right, to security from the
corporal insults of menaces, assaults, beating, and
wounding; though such insults amount not to
destruction of life or member.
4. The preservation of a man’s health from such
practices as may prejudice or annoy it; and
5. The security of his reputation or good name
from the arts of detraction and slander, are rights to
which every man is entitled by reason and natural
8
justice; since, without these, it is impossible to have the
perfect enjoyment of any other advantage or right. But
these three last articles (being of much less importance
than those which have gone before, and those which
are yet to come,) it will suffice to have barely mentioned
among the rights of persons: referring the more minute
discussion of their several branches to those parts of
our commentaries which treat of the infringement of
these rights, under the head of personal wrongs.
“Next to personal security, the law of
England regards, asserts, and
preserves the personal liberty of
individuals. This personal liberty
consists in the power of locomotion, of
changing situation, or moving one’s
person to whatsoever place one’s own
inclination may direct, without
imprisonment or restraint, unless by
due course of law.”
II. Next to personal security, the law of England
regards, asserts, and preserves the personal liberty of
individuals. This personal liberty consists in the power
of locomotion, of changing situation, or moving one’s
person to whatsoever place one’s own inclination may
direct, without imprisonment or restraint, unless by due
course of law. Concerning which we may make the
same observations as upon the preceding article, that it
is a right strictly natural; that the laws of England have
never abridged it without sufficient cause; and that, in
this kingdom, it cannot ever be abridged at the mere
discretion of the magistrate, without the explicit
permission of the laws. Here again the language of the
great charter(i) is, that no freeman shall be taken or
imprisoned but by the lawful judgment of his equals, or
by the law of the land. And many subsequent old
statutes(j) expressly direct, that no man shall be taken
or imprisoned by suggestion or petition to the king or
his council, unless it be by legal indictment, or the
process of the common law. By the petition of right, 3
Car. I., it is enacted, that no freeman shall be
imprisoned or detained without cause shown, to which
he may make answer according to law. By 16 Car. 1. c.
10, if any person be restrained of his liberty by order
or decree of any illegal court, or by command of the
king’s majesty in person, or by warrant of the council
board, or of any of the privy council, he shall, upon
demand of his counsel, have a writ of habeas corpus, to
bring his body before the court of king’s bench or
common pleas, who shall determine whether the cause
of his commitment be just, and thereupon do as to
justice shall appertain. And by 31 Car. II. c. 2,
commonly called the habeas corpus act, the methods of
obtaining this writ are so plainly pointed out and
enforced, that, so long as this statute remains
unimpeached, no subject of England can be long
detained in prison, except in those cases in which the
law requires and justifies such detainer. And, lest this
act should be evaded by demanding unreasonable bail
or sureties for the prisoner’s appearance, it is declared
by 1 W. and M. st. 2, c. 2, that excessive bail ought not
to be required.
Of great importance to the public is the
preservation of this personal liberty; for if once it were
left in the power of any the highest magistrate to
imprison arbitrarily whomever he or his officers
thought proper, (as in France it is daily practised by the
crown,)(k) there would soon be an end of all other
rights and immunities. Some have thought that unjust
attacks, even upon life or property, at the arbitrary will
of the magistrate, are less dangerous to the
commonwealth than such as are made upon the
personal liberty of the subject. To bereave a man of
life, or by violence to confiscate his estate, without
accusation or trial, would be so gross and notorious an
act of despotism, as must at once convey the alarm of
tyranny throughout the whole kingdom; but
confinement of the person, by secretly hurrying him to
jail, where his sufferings are unknown or forgotten, is a
less public, a less striking, and therefore a more
dangerous engine of arbitrary government. And yet
sometimes, when the state is in real danger, even this
may be a necessary measure. But the happiness of our
constitution is, that it is not left to the executive power
to determine when the danger of the state is so great as
to render this measure expedient; for it is the
parliament only, or legislative power, that, whenever it
sees proper, can authorize the crown, by suspending
the habeas corpus act for a short and limited time, to
imprison suspected persons without giving any reason
for so doing; as the senate of Rome was wont to have
9
recourse to a dictator, a magistrate of absolute
authority, when they judged the republic in any
imminent danger. The decree of the senate, which
usually preceded the nomination of this magistrate,
“dent operam consules ne quid respublica detrimenti capiat,” was
called the senatus consultum ultimæ necessitatis. In like
manner this experiment ought only to be tried in cases
of extreme emergency; and in these the nation parts
with its liberty for a while, in order to preserve it
forever.
The confinement of the person, in any wise, is an
imprisonment; so that the keeping a man against his
will in a private house, putting him in the stocks,
arresting or forcibly detaining him in the street, is an
imprisonment.(l) And the law so much discourages
unlawful confinement, that if a man is under duress of
imprisonment, which we before explained to mean a
compulsion by an illegal restraint of liberty, until he
seals a bond or the like, he may allege this duress, and
avoid the extorted bond. But if a man be lawfully
imprisoned, and, either to procure his discharge, or on
any other fair account, seals a bond or a deed, this is
not by duress of imprisonment, and he is not at liberty
to avoid it.(m) To make imprisonment lawful, it must
either be by process from the courts of judicature, or by
warrant from some legal officer having authority to
commit to prison; which warrant must be in writing,
under the hand and seal of the magistrate, and express
the causes of the commitment, in order to be examined
into, if necessary, upon a habeas corpus. If there be no
cause expressed, the jailer is not bound to detain the
prisoner;(n) for the law judges, in this respect, saith Sir
Edward Coke, like Festus the Roman governor, that it
is unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not to signify
withal the crimes alleged.
A natural and regular consequence of this
personal liberty is, that every Englishman may claim a
right to abide in his own country so long as he pleases;
and not to be driven from it unless by the sentence of
the law. The king, indeed, by his royal prerogative, may
issue out his writ ne exeat regno, and prohibit any of his
subjects from going into foreign parts without license.
(o) This may be necessary for the public service and
safeguard of the commonwealth. But no power on
earth, except the authority of parliament, can send any
subject of England out of the land against his will; no,
not even a criminal. For exile and transportation are
punishments at present unknown to the common law;
and, wherever the latter is now inflicted, it is either by
the choice of the criminal himself to escape a capital
punishment, or else by the express direction of some
modern act of parliament. To this purpose the great
charter(p) declares, that no freeman shall be banished,
unless by the judgment of his peers, or by the law of
the land. And by the habeas corpus act, 31 Car. II. c. 2,
(that second magna carta, and stable bulwark of our
liberties,) it is enacted, that no subject of this realm,
who is an inhabitant of England, Wales, or Berwick,
shall be sent prisoner into Scotland, Ireland, Jersey,
Guernsey, or places beyond the seas, (where they
cannot have the full benefit and protection of the
common law;) but that all such imprisonments shall be
illegal; that the person, who shall dare to commit
another contrary to this law, shall be disabled from
bearing any office, shall incur the penalty of a
præmunire, and be incapable of receiving the king’s
pardon; and the party suffering shall also have his
private action against the person committing, and all
his aiders, advisers, and abettors; and shall recover
treble costs; besides his damages, which no jury shall
assess at less than five hundred pounds.
The law is in this respect so benignly and liberally
construed for the benefit of the subject, that, though
within the realm the king may command the attendance
and service of all his liegemen, yet he cannot send any
man out of the realm, even upon the public service;
excepting sailors and soldiers, the nature of whose
employment necessarily implies an exception: he
cannot even constitute a man lord deputy or lieutenant
of Ireland against his will, nor make him a foreign
ambassador.(q) For this might, in reality, be no more
than an honourable exile.
“The third absolute right, inherent in
every Englishman, is that of property:
which consists in the free use,
enjoyment, and disposal of all his
acquisitions, without any control or
diminution, save only by the laws of
the land.”
III. The third absolute right, inherent in every
Englishman, is that of property: which consists in the
free use, enjoyment, and disposal of all his acquisitions,
10
without any control or diminution, save only by the
laws of the land. The original of private property is
probably founded in nature, as will be more fully
explained in the second book of the ensuing
commentaries: but certainly the modifications under
which we at present find it, the method of conserving it
in the present owner, and of translating it from man to
man, are entirely derived from society; and are some of
those civil advantages, in exchange for which every
individual has resigned a part of his natural liberty.
The laws of England are therefore, in point of honour
and justice, extremely watchful in ascertaining and
protecting this right. Upon this principle the great
charter(r) has declared that no freeman shall be
disseised, or divested, of his freehold, or of his liberties,
or free customs, but by the judgment of his peers, or by
the law of the land. And by a variety of ancient
statutes(s) it is enacted, that no man’s lands or goods
shall be seized into the king’s hands, against the great
charter, and the law of the land; and that no man shall
be disinherited, nor put out of his franchises or
freehold, unless he be duly brought to answer, and be
forejudged by course of law; and if any thing be done
to the contrary, it shall be redressed, and holden for
none.
“So great moreover is the regard of the
law for private property, that it will not
authorize the least violation of it; no,
not even for the general good of the
whole community.”
So great moreover is the regard of the law for
private property, that it will not authorize the least
violation of it; no, not even for the general good of the
whole community. If a new road, for instance, were to
be made through the grounds of a private person, it
might perhaps be extensively beneficial to the public;
but the law permits no man, or set of men, to do this
without consent of the owner of the land. In vain may
it be urged, that the good of the individual ought to
yield to that of the community; for it would be
dangerous to allow any private man, or even any public
tribunal, to be the judge of this common good, and to
decide whether it be expedient or no. Besides, the
public good is in nothing more essentially interested,
than in the protection of every individual’s private
rights, as modelled by the municipal law. In this and
similar cases the legislature alone can, and indeed
frequently does, interpose, and compel the individual
to acquiesce. But how does it interpose and compel?
Not by absolutely stripping the subject of his property
in an arbitrary manner; but by giving him a full
indemnification and equivalent for the injury thereby
sustained. The public is now considered as an
individual, treating with an individual for an exchange.
All that the legislature does is to oblige the owner to
alienate his possessions for a reasonable price; and even
this is an exertion of power, which the legislature
indulges with caution, and which nothing but the
legislature can perform.
Nor is this the only instance in which the law of
the land has postponed even public necessity to the
sacred and inviolable rights of private property. For no
subject of England can be constrained to pay any aids
or taxes, even for the defence of the realm or the
support of government, but such as are imposed by his
own consent, or that of his representatives in
parliament. By the statute 25 Edw. I. c. 5 and 6, it is
provided, that the king shall not take any aids or tasks,
but by the common assent of the realm. And what that
common assent is, is more fully explained by 34 Edw. I.
st. 4, c. 1, which(t) enacts that no talliage or aid shall be
taken without the assent of the archbishops, bishops,
earls, barons, knights, burgesses, and other freemen of
the land: and again by 14 Edw. III. st. 2, c. 1, the
prelates, earls, barons, and commons, citizens,
burgesses, and merchants, shall not be charged to make
any aid, if it be not by the common assent of the great
men and commons in parliament. And as this
fundamental law had been shamefully evaded under
many succeeding princes, by compulsive loans, and
benevolences extorted without a real and voluntary
consent, it was made an article in the petition of right 3
Car. I., that no man shall be compelled to yield any
gift, loan, or benevolence, tax, or such like charge
without common consent by act of parliament. And,
lastly, by the statute 1 W. and M. st. 2, c. 2, it is
declared, that levying money for or to the use of the
crown, by pretence of prerogative, without grant of
parliament, or for longer time, or in other manner,
than the same is or shall be granted, is illegal.
In the three preceding articles we have taken a
short view of the principal absolute rights which
appertain to every Englishman. But in vain would these
11
rights be declared, ascertained, and protected by the
dead letter of the laws, if the constitution had provided
no other method to secure their actual enjoyment. It
has therefore established certain other auxiliary
subordinate rights of the subject, which serve
principally as outworks or barriers to protect and
maintain inviolate the three great and primary rights,
of personal security, personal liberty, and private
property. These are,
1. The constitution, powers, and privileges of
parliament; of which I shall treat at large in the
ensuing chapter.
2. The limitation of the king’s prerogative, by
bounds so certain and notorious, that it is impossible he
should either mistake or legally exceed them without
the consent of the people. Of this, also, I shall treat in
its proper place. The former of these keeps the
legislative power in due health and vigour, so as to
make it improbable that laws should be enacted
destructive of general liberty: the latter is a guard upon
the executive power by restraining it from acting either
beyond or in contradiction to the laws, that are framed
and established by the other.
3. A third subordinate right of every Englishman
is that of applying to the courts of justice for redress of
injuries. Since the law is in England the supreme
arbiter of every man’s life, liberty, and property, courts
of justice must at all times be open to the subject, and
the law be duly administered therein. The emphatical
words of magna carta,(u) spoken in the person of the
king, who in judgment of law (says Sir Edward Coke)
(w) is ever present and repeating them in all his courts,
are these; nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut differemus
rectum vel justitiam: “and therefore every subject,”
continues the same learned author, “for injury done to
him in bonis, in terris, vel persona, by any other subject, be
he ecclesiastical or temporal, without any exception,
may take his remedy by the course of the law, and have
justice and right for the injury done to him, freely
without sale, fully without any denial, and speedily
without delay.” It were endless to enumerate all the
affirmative acts of parliament, wherein justice is directed
to be done according to the law of the land; and what
that law is every subject knows, or may know, if he
pleases; for it depends not upon the arbitrary will of
any judge, but is permanent, fixed, and unchangeable,
unless by authority of parliament. I shall, however, just
mention a few negative statutes, whereby abuses,
perversions, or delays of justice, especially by the
prerogative, are restrained. It is ordained by magna carta,
(x) that no freeman shall be outlawed, that is, put out of
the protection and benefit of the laws, but according to
the law of the land. By 2 Edw. III. c. 8, and 11 Ric. II.
c. 10, it is enacted, that no commands or letters shall be
sent under the great seal, or the little seal, the signet, or
privy seal, in disturbance of the law; or to disturb or
delay common right: and, though such commandments
should come, the judges shall not cease to do right;
which is also made a part of their oath by statute 18
Edw. III. st. 4. And by 1 W. and M. st. 2, c. 2, it is
declared that the pretended power of suspending, or
dispensing with laws, or the execution of laws, by regal
authority, without consent of parliament, is illegal.
“(There are) certain other auxiliary
subordinate rights of the subject, which
serve principally as outworks or
barriers to protect and maintain
inviolate the three great and primary
rights, of personal security, personal
liberty, and private property. These
are ... the constitution, powers, and
privileges of parliament; the limitation
of the king’s prerogative, (and) that of
applying to the courts of justice for
redress of injuries.”
Not only the substantial part, or judicial decisions,
of the law, but also the formal part, or method of
proceeding, cannot be altered but by parliament; for, if
once those outworks were demolished, there would be
an inlet to all manner of innovation in the body of the
law itself. The king, it is true, may erect new courts of
justice; but then they must proceed according to the
old-established forms of the common law. For which
reason it is declared, in the statute 16 Car. I. c. 10,
upon the dissolution of the court of starchamber, that
neither his majesty, nor his privy council, have any
jurisdiction, power, or authority, by English bill,
petition, articles, libel, (which were the course of
proceeding in the starchamber, borrowed from the civil
12
law,) or by any other arbitrary way whatsoever, to
examine, or draw into question, determine, or dispose
of the lands or goods of any subjects of this kingdom;
but that the same ought to be tried and determined in
the ordinary courts of justice, and by course of law.
“The fifth and last auxiliary right of
the subject ... is that of having arms for
their defence, suitable to their
condition and degree, and such as are
allowed by law. (A)lso declared by the
same statute is indeed a public
allowance, under due restrictions, of
the natural right of resistance and selfpreservation, when the sanctions of
society and laws are found insufficient
to restrain the violence of oppression.”
4. If there should happen any uncommon injury,
or infringement of the rights before mentioned, which
the ordinary course of law is too defective to reach,
there still remains a fourth subordinate right,
appertaining to every individual, namely, the right of
petitioning the king, or either house of parliament, for
the redress of grievances. In Russia we are told(y) that
the czar Peter established a law, that no subject might
petition the throne till he had first petitioned two
different ministers of state. In case he obtained justice
from neither, he might then present a third petition to
the prince; but upon pain of death, if found to be in
the wrong: the consequence of which was, that no one
dared to offer such third petition; and grievances
seldom falling under the notice of the sovereign, he
had little opportunity to redress them. The restrictions,
for some there are, which are laid upon petitioning in
England, are of a nature extremely different; and,
while they promote the spirit of peace, they are no
check upon that of liberty. Care only must be taken,
lest, under the pretence of petitioning, the subject be
guilty of any riot or tumult, as happened in the
opening of the memorable parliament in 1640: and, to
prevent this, it is provided by the statute 13 Car. II. st.
1, c. 5, that no petition to the king, or either house of
parliament, for any alteration in church or state, shall
be signed by above twenty persons, unless the matter
thereof be approved by three justices of the peace, or
the major part of the grand jury in the country; and in
London by the lord mayor, aldermen, and common
council: nor shall any petition be presented by more
than ten persons at a time. But, under these
regulations, it is declared by the statute 1 W. and M. st.
2, c. 2, that the subject hath a right to petition; and that
all commitments and prosecutions for such petitioning
are illegal.
5. The fifth and last auxiliary right of the subject,
that I shall at present mention, is that of having arms
for their defence, suitable to their condition and degree,
and such as are allowed by law. Which is also declared
by the same statute, 1 W. and M. st. 2, c. 2, and is
indeed a public allowance, under due restrictions, of
the natural right of resistance and self-preservation,
when the sanctions of society and laws are found
insufficient to restrain the violence of oppression.
In these several articles consist the rights, or, as
they are frequently termed, the liberties of Englishmen:
liberties more generally talked of, than thoroughly
understood; and yet highly necessary to be perfectly
known and considered by every man of rank and
property, lest his ignorance of the points whereon they
are founded should hurry him into faction and
licentiousness on the one hand, or a pusillanimous
indifference and criminal submission on the other. And
we have seen that these rights consist, primarily, in the
free enjoyment of personal security, of personal liberty,
and of private property. So long as these remain
inviolate, the subject is perfectly free; for every species
of compulsive tyranny and oppression must act in
opposition to one or other of these rights, having no
other object upon which it can possibly be employed.
To preserve these from violation, it is necessary that the
constitution of parliament be supported in its full
vigour; and limits, certainly known, be set to the royal
prerogative. And, lastly, to vindicate these rights, when
actually violated or attacked, the subjects of England
are entitled, in the first place, to the regular
administration and free course of justice in the courts
of law; next, to the right of petitioning the king and
parliament for redress of grievances; and, lastly, to the
right of having and using arms for self-preservation
and defence. And all these rights and liberties it is our
birthright to enjoy entire; unless where the laws of our
13
country have laid them under necessary restraints:
restraints in themselves so gentle and moderate, as will
appear, upon further inquiry, that no man of sense or
probity would wish to see them slackened. For all of us
have it in our choice to do every thing that a good man
would desire to do; and are restrained from nothing but
what would be pernicious either to ourselves or our
fellow-citizens. So that this review of our situation may
fully justify the observation of a learned French author,
who indeed generally both thought and wrote in the
spirit of genuine freedom,(z) and who hath not
scrupled to profess, even in the very bosom of his
native country, that the English is the only nation in the
world where political or civil liberty is the direct end of
its constitution. Recommending, therefore, to the
student in our laws a further and more accurate search
into this extensive and important title, I shall close my
remarks upon it with the expiring wish of the famous
father Paul to his country, “Esto Perpetua.”
“The liberties of Englishmen ...
consist, primarily, in the free
enjoyment of personal security, of
personal liberty, and of private
property. So long as these remain
inviolate, the subject is perfectly free;
for every species of compulsive tyranny
and oppression must act in opposition
to one or other of these rights, having
no other object upon which it can
possibly be employed.”
Notes
[This is a heavily annotated edition of Blackstone.
We have removed the annotations of the
commentators for the sake of brevity, leaving just
Blackstone's own notes.]
[(a)] 11 Philipp. 12.
[(b)]l. 1, c. 3.
[(c)]Fucultas ejus, quod cuique facere libet, nisi quid jure
prohibeter. Inst. 1, 3, 1.
[(d)] 3 Edw. IV. c. 5.
[(e)] 30 Car. II. st. 1, c. 3.
[(f)] On Gov. p. 2, 57.
[(g)] Salk. 666. See ch. 14.
[(h)] 2 Inst. proem.
[(i)] 25 Edw. 1.
[(k)] 2 Inst. proem.
[(l)] 1 W. and M. st. 2, c. 2.
[(m)] 12 and 13 W. III. c. 2.
[(n)] Plowd. 55.
[(o)]Si aliquis mulierem pregnantem percusserit, vel ei
venenum dederit, per quod fecerit abortivam; si puerperium jam
formatum fuerit, et maxime si fuerit animatum, facit homicidium.
Bracton, l. 3, c. 21.
[(p)] 3 Inst. 50.
[(q)] Stat. 12 Car. II. c. 24.
[(r)] Stat. 10 and 11 W. III. c. 16.
[(s)]Qui in utero sunt, in jure civili intelliguntur in rerum
natura esse, cum de eorum commodo agatur. Ff. 1, 5, 26.
[(t)] 2 Inst. 483.
[(u)]l. 2, c. 5.
[(x)] 2 Inst. 483.
[(y)]L. 11, c. 27.
[(z)] Co. Litt. 133.
[(a)] This was also a rule in the feodal law, l. 2, c.
21: desiit esse miles seculi, qui factus est miles Christi; nec
beneficium pertinet ad eum qui non debet genere officium.
[(b)] Litt. 200.
[(c)] Co. Litt. 133.
[(d)] 2 Rep. 48; Co. Litt. 182.
[(e)] Co. Litt. 132.
[(f)] 1 Salk. 162.
[(g)] C. 29.
[(h)] 2 Inst. 48.
[(i)] C. 29.
[(j)] 5 Edw. III. c. 9. 25 Edw. III. st. 5. c. 4. 28
Edw. III. c. 3.
[(k)] I have been assured upon good authority, that,
during the mild administration of Cardinal Fleury,
14
above 54,000 lettres de cachet were issued upon the single
ground of the famous bull unigenitus.
[(l)] 2 Inst. 589.
[(m)] 2 Inst. 482.
[(n)] Ibid. 52, 53.
[(o)] F. N. B. 85.
[(p)] C. 29.
[(q)] 2 Inst. 46.
[(r)] C. 29.
[(s)] 5 Edw. III. c. 9. 25 Edw. III. st. 5, c. 4; 28
Edw. III. c. 3.
[(t)] See the introduction to the great charter, (edit.
Oxon.) sub anno 1297; wherein it is shown that this
statute de talliagio non concedendo, supposed to have been
made in 34 Edw. I., is, in reality, nothing more than a
sort of translation into Latin of the confirmatio cartarum,
25 Edw. I., which was originally published in the
Norman language.
[(u)] C. 29.
[(w)] 2 Inst. 55.
[(x)] C. 29.
[(y)] Montesq. Sp. L. xii. 26.
[(z)] Montesq. Sp. L. 5.
15
Further Information
SOURCE
The edition used for this extract: Sir William
Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England in Four
Books. Notes selected from the editions of Archibold, Christian,
Coleridge, Chitty, Stewart, Kerr, and others, Barron Field’s
Analysis, and Additional Notes, and a Life of the Author by
George Sharswood. In Two Volumes. (Philadelphia: J.B.
Lippincott Co., 1893). Vol. 1, Book I, Chap. 1 "Of the
Absolute Rights of Individuals." <http://
oll.libertyfund.org/title/2140/198653>
FURTHER READING
Other works by Sir William Blackstone
(1723-1780)
Other works on the Law: <oll.libertyfund.org/
collection/50>.
“The distinctive principle of Western
social philosophy is individualism. It
aims at the creation of a sphere in
which the individual is free to think, to
choose, and to act without being
restrained by the interference of the
social apparatus of coercion and
oppression, the State.”
[Ludwig von Mises, “Liberty and
Property” (1958)]
ABOUT THE BEST OF THE OLL
“The Best of the Online Library of Liberty” is a
collection of some of the most important and
influential writings in Liberty Fund’s Online Library of
Liberty . They are
presented in a convenient leaflet form with links back
to the OLL website for those who would like to read
more.
Another useful sampling of the contents of the site
is the collection of weekly “Quotations about Liberty
and Power” which are organized by themes such as
Free Trade, Money and Banking, Natural Rights, and
so on. See for example, Richard Cobden’s “I have a
dream” speech .
ABOUT THE OLL AND LIBERTY FUND
The Online Library of Liberty (OLL) is a project of
Liberty Fund, Inc., a private educational foundation
established in 1960 to encourage the study of the ideal
of a society of free and responsible individuals. The
OLL website has a large collection of books and study
guides about individual liberty, limited constitutional
government, the free market, and peace.
Liberty Fund: .

16
