THE OLL READER: AN ANTHOLOGY OF THE BEST
OF THE OLL
No. 70: David Hume, "Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth" (1777)
<oll.libertyfund.org/titles/2712>
"As one form of government must be allowed more perfect than another,
independent of the manners and humours of particular men; why may we not
enquire what is the most perfect of all, though the common botched and
inaccurate governments seem to serve the purposes of society, and though it
be not so easy to establish a new system of government, as to build a vessel
upon a new construction?"
David Hume (1711-1776)
The OLL Reader <oll.libertyfund.org/pages/best-of-the-oll>
Quotations about Liberty and Power <oll.libertyfund.org/quotes>
[January, 2016]
1 of 12
Editor's Introduction
David Hume (1711-1776) was a moral philosopher
and historian and a leading member of the Scottish
Enlightenment. In philosophy he was a skeptic. In his
multi-volume History of England he showed how the
rule of law and the creation of an independent judiciary
created the foundation for liberty in England. Hume
also wrote on economics, was a personal friend of
Adam Smith, and was a proponent of free trade. His
works highlighted the neutrality of money and the
errors of the mercantilists.
After making his name as a philosopher with works
like The Treatise of Human Nature (1740) and An
Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (1748),
Hume turned to writing a multi-volume History of
England (1754–62) in which he traced the emergence
of modern Britain with its constutional monarchy. His
ideal form of government was not known in any detail
until the posthumous appearance of the essay "Idea of a
Perfect Commonwealth" in 1777. He died before the
American Revolution created a new form of a Republic
which might have pleased him considerably.
In this essay, which is at times quite technical in its
detail, he draws up an elaborate scheme for a "perfect
commonwealth" for which he borrows aspects of
James Harrington's Commonwealth of Oceana (1656)
and Oliver Cromwell's Commonwealth (1653-59)
during the English Revolution. His other model
included the United Provinces of the Netherlands.
Some of the interesting things to note include the
following: that earlier attempts to create a perfect
society made the fundamental error of trying to change
human nature; government institutions should be
radically decentralised into counties and parishes
which would elect their own representatives; that only
property owners who have stake in the society should
be allowed to vote; that political power should be
balanced by a Senate and a Representative (house of
representatives); that small commonwealths (perhaps
even city states) were "happier" than large ones; and
that war and conquest were "the ruin of every free
government."
"All plans of government, which
suppose great reformation in the
manners of mankind, are plainly
imaginary. Of this nature, are the
Republic of Plato, and the Utopia of Sir
Thomas More. The Oceana is the only
valuable model of a commonwealth,
that has yet been offered to the public."
"That the foregoing plan of
government is practicable, no one can
doubt, who considers the resemblance
that it bears to the commonwealth of
the United Provinces, a wise and
renowned government."
"The plan of Cromwell’s parliament
ought to be restored, by making the
representation equal, and by allowing
none to vote in the county elections who
possess not a property of 200 pounds
value."
2 of 12
David Hume, "Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth" (1777)
It is not with forms of government, as with other
artificial contrivances; where an old engine may be
rejected, if we can discover another more accurate and
commodious, or where trials may safely be made, even
though the success be doubtful. An established
government has an infinite advantage, by that very
circumstance of its being established; the bulk of
mankind being governed by authority, not reason, and
never attributing authority to any thing that has not the
recommendation of antiquity. To tamper, therefore, in
this affair, or try experiments merely upon the credit of
supposed argument and philosophy, can never be the
part of a wise magistrate, who will bear a reverence to
what carries the marks of age; and though he may
attempt some improvements for the public good, yet
will he adjust his innovations, as much as possible, to
the ancient fabric, and preserve entire the chief pillars
and supports of the constitution.
The mathematicians in Europe have been much
divided concerning that figure of a ship, which is the
most commodious for sailing; and Huygens,1 who at
last determined the controversy, is justly thought to
have obliged the learned, as well as commercial world;
though Columbus had sailed to America, and Sir
Francis Drake made the tour of the world,2 without any
such discovery. As one form of government must be
allowed more perfect than another, independent of the
manners and humours of particular men; why may we
not enquire what is the most perfect of all, though the
common botched and inaccurate governments seem to
serve the purposes of society, and though it be not so
easy to establish a new system of government, as to
build a vessel upon a new construction? The subject is
surely the most worthy curiosity of any the wit of man
can possibly devise. And who knows, if this
controversy were fixed by the universal consent of the
wise and learned, but, in some future age, an
opportunity might be afforded of reducing the theory to
practice, either by a dissolution of some old
government, or by the combination of men to form a
new one, in some distant part of the world? In all cases,
it must be advantageous to know what is most perfect
in the kind, that we may be able to bring any real
constitution or form of government as near it as
possible, by such gentle alterations and innovations as
may not give too great disturbance to society.
All I pretend to in the present essay is to revive this
subject of speculation; and therefore I shall deliver my
sentiments in as few words as possible. A long
dissertation on that head would not, I apprehend, be
very acceptable to the public, who will be apt to regard
such disquisitions both as useless and chimerical.
All plans of government, which suppose great
reformation in the manners of mankind, are plainly
imaginary. Of this nature, are the Republic of Plato,
and the Utopia of Sir Thomas More.3 The Oceana is
the only valuable model of a commonwealth, that has
yet been offered to the public.4
"All plans of government, which
suppose great reformation in the
manners of mankind, are plainly
imaginary. Of this nature, are the
Republic of Plato, and the Utopia of Sir
Thomas More. The Oceana is the only
valuable model of a commonwealth,
that has yet been offered to the public."
The chief defects of the Oceana seem to be these.
First, Its rotation is inconvenient, by throwing men, of
whatever abilities, by intervals, out of public
employments. Secondly, Its Agrarian is impracticable.
Men will soon learn the art, which was practised in
ancient Rome, of concealing their possessions under
other people’s name; till at last, the abuse will become
so common, that they will throw off even the
appearance of restraint. Thirdly, The Oceana provides
not a sufficient security for liberty, or the redress of
grievances. The senate must propose, and the people
consent; by which means, the senate have not only a
negative upon the people, but, what is of much greater
consequence, their negative goes before the votes of
the people. Were the King’s negative of the same
nature in the English constitution, and could he prevent
any bill from coming into parliament, he would be an
absolute monarch. As his negative follows the votes of
the houses, it is of little consequence: Such a difference
is there in the manner of placing the same thing. When
a popular bill has been debated in parliament, is
brought to maturity, all its conveniencies and
inconveniencies, weighed and balanced; if afterwards it
be presented for the royal assent, few princes will
venture to reject the unanimous desire of the people.
But could the King crush a disagreeable bill in embryo
(as was the case, for some time, in the Scottish
parliament, by means of the lords of the articles5), the
British government would have no balance, nor would
grievances ever be redressed: And it is certain, that
exorbitant power proceeds not, in any government,
from new laws, so much as from neglecting to remedy
the abuses, which frequently rise from the old ones. A
government, says Machiavel, must often be brought
3 of 12
back to its original principles.6 It appears then, that, in
the Oceana, the whole legislature may be said to rest in
the senate; which Harrington would own to be an
inconvenient form of government, especially after the
Agrarian is abolished.
Here is a form of government, to which I cannot, in
theory, discover any considerable objection.
Let Great Britain and Ireland, or any territory of
equal extent, be divided into 100 counties, and each
county into 100 parishes, making in all 10,000. If the
country, proposed to be erected into a commonwealth
be of more narrow extent, we may diminish the number
of counties; but never bring them below thirty. If it be
of greater extent, it were better to enlarge the parishes,
or throw more parishes into a county, than encrease the
number of counties.
Let all the freeholders of twenty pounds a-year in
the county, and all the householders worth 500 pounds
in the town parishes, meet annually in the parish
church, and chuse, by ballot, some freeholder of the
county for their member, whom we shall call the
county representative.
"Let all the freeholders of twenty
pounds a-year in the county, and all the
householders worth 500 pounds in the
town parishes, meet annually in the
parish church, and chuse, by ballot,
some freeholder of the county for their
member, whom we shall call the county
representative."
Let the 100 county representatives, two days after
their election, meet in the county town, and chuse by
ballot, from their own body, ten county magistrates,
and one senator. There are, therefore, in the whole
commonwealth, 100 senators, 1100 county magistrates,
and 10,000 county representatives. For we shall bestow
on all senators the authority of county magistrates, and
on all county magistrates the authority of county
representatives.
Let the senators meet in the capital, and be
endowed with the whole executive power of the
commonwealth; the power of peace and war, of giving
orders to generals, admirals, and ambassadors, and, in
short, all the prerogatives of a British King, except his
negative.
Let the county representatives meet in their
particular counties, and possess the whole legislative
power of the commonwealth; the greater number of
counties deciding the question; and where these are
equal, let the senate have the casting vote.
Every new law must first be debated in the senate;
and though rejected by it, if ten senators insist and
protest, it must be sent down to the counties. The
senate, if they please, may join to the copy of the law
their reasons for receiving or rejecting it.
Because it would be troublesome to assemble all
the county representatives for every trivial law, that
may be requisite, the senate have their choice of
sending down the law either to the county magistrates
or county representatives.
The magistrates, though the law be referred to
them, may, if they please, call the representatives, and
submit the affair to their determination.
Whether the law be referred by the senate to the
county magistrates or representatives, a copy of it, and
of the senate’s reasons, must be sent to every
representative eight days before the day appointed for
the assembling, in order to deliberate concerning it.
And though the determination be, by the senate,
referred to the magistrates, if five representatives of the
county order the magistrates to assemble the whole
court of representatives, and submit the affair to their
determination, they must obey.
Either the county magistrates or representatives
may give, to the senator of the county, the copy of a
law to be proposed to the senate; and if five counties
concur in the same order, the law, though refused by
the senate, must come either to the county magistrates
or representatives, as is contained in the order of the
five counties.
Any twenty counties, by a vote either of their
magistrates or representatives, may throw any man out
of all public offices for a year. Thirty counties for three
years.
The senate has a power of throwing out any
member or number of members of its own body, not to
be re-elected for that year. The senate cannot throw out
twice in a year the senator of the same county.
The power of the old senate continues for three
weeks after the annual election of the county
representatives. Then all the new senators are shut up
in a conclave, like the cardinals; and by an intricate
ballot, such as that of Venice7 or Malta, they chuse the
following magistrates; a protector, who represents the
dignity of the commonwealth, and presides in the
senate; two secretaries of state; these six councils, a
council of state, a council of religion and learning, a
4 of 12
council of trade, a council of laws, a council of war, a
council of the admiralty, each council consisting of five
persons; together with six commissioners of the
treasury and a first commissioner. All these must be
senators. The senate also names all the ambassadors to
foreign courts, who may either be senators or not.
The senate may continue any or all of these, but
must re-elect them every year.
The protector and two secretaries have session and
suffrage in the council of state. The business of that
council is all foreign politics. The council of state has
session and suffrage in all the other councils.
The council of religion and learning inspects the
universities and clergy. That of trade inspects every
thing that may affect commerce. That of laws inspects
all the abuses of law by the inferior magistrates, and
examines what improvements may be made of the
municipal law. That of war inspects the militia and its
discipline, magazines, stores, &c. and when the
republic is in war, examines into the proper orders for
generals. The council of admiralty has the same power
with regard to the navy, together with the nomination
of the captains and all inferior officers.
"The council of religion and
learning inspects the universities and
clergy. That of trade inspects every
thing that may affect commerce. That
of laws inspects all the abuses of law by
the inferior magistrates, and examines
what improvements may be made of the
municipal law."
None of these councils can give orders themselves,
except where they receive such powers from the
senate. In other cases, they must communicate every
thing to the senate.
When the senate is under adjournment, any of the
councils may assemble it before the day appointed for
its meeting.
Besides these councils or courts, there is another
called the court of competitors; which is thus
constituted. If any candidates for the office of senator
have more votes than a third of the representatives, that
candidate, who has most votes, next to the senator
elected, becomes incapable for one year of all public
offices, even of being a magistrate or representative:
But he takes his seat in the court of competitors. Here
then is a court which may sometimes consist of a
hundred members, sometimes have no members at all;
and by that means, be for a year abolished.
The court of competitors has no power in the
commonwealth. It has only the inspection of public
accounts, and the accusing of any man before the
senate. If the senate acquit him, the court of
competitors may, if they please, appeal to the people,
either magistrates or representatives. Upon that appeal,
the magistrates or representatives meet on the day
appointed by the court of competitors, and chuse in
each county three persons; from which number every
senator is excluded. These, to the number of 300, meet
in the capital, and bring the person accused to a new
trial.
The court of competitors may propose any law to
the senate; and if refused, may appeal to the people,
that is, to the magistrates or representatives, who
examine it in their counties. Every senator, who is
thrown out of the senate by a vote of the court, takes
his seat in the court of competitors.
The senate possesses all the judicative authority of
the house of Lords, that is, all the appeals from the
inferior courts. It likewise appoints the Lord
Chancellor, and all the officers of the law.
Every county is a kind of republic within itself, and
the representatives may make bye-laws; which have no
authority ’till three months after they are voted. A copy
of the law is sent to the senate, and to every other
county. The senate, or any single county, may, at any
time, annul any bye-law of another county.
"Every county is a kind of republic
within itself, and the representatives
may make bye-laws; which have no
authority ’till three months after they
are voted."
The representatives have all the authority of the
British justices of peace in trials, commitments, &c.
The magistrates have the appointment of all the
officers of the revenue in each county. All causes with
regard to the revenue are carried ultimately by appeal
before the magistrates. They pass the accompts of all
the officers; but must have their own accompts
examined and passed at the end of the year by the
representatives.
The magistrates name rectors or ministers to all the
parishes.
The Presbyterian government is established; and the
highest ecclesiastical court is an assembly or synod of
all the presbyters of the county. The magistrates may
take any cause from this court, and determine it
5 of 12
themselves.
The magistrates may try, and depose or suspend any
presbyter.
The militia is established in imitation of that of
Swisserland, which being well known, we shall not
insist upon it.8 It will only be proper to make this
addition, that an army of 20,000 men be annually
drawn out by rotation, paid and encamped during six
weeks in summer; that the duty of a camp may not be
altogether unknown.
The magistrates appoint all the colonels and
downwards. The senate all upwards. During war, the
general appoints the colonel and downwards, and his
commission is good for a twelvemonth. But after that,
it must be confirmed by the magistrates of the county,
to which the regiment belongs. The magistrates may
break any officer in the county regiment. And the
senate may do the same to any officer in the service. If
the magistrates do not think proper to confirm the
general’s choice, they may appoint another officer in
the place of him they reject.
All crimes are tried within the county by the
magistrates and a jury. But the senate can stop any trial,
and bring it before themselves.
Any county may indict any man before the senate
for any crime.
The protector, the two secretaries, the council of
state, with any five or more that the senate appoints, are
possessed, on extraordinary emergencies, of dictatorial
power for six months.
The protector may pardon any person condemned
by the inferior courts.
In time of war, no officer of the army that is in the
field can have any civil office in the commonwealth.
The capital, which we shall call London, may be
allowed four members in the senate. It may therefore
be divided into four counties. The representatives of
each of these chuse one senator, and ten magistrates.
There are therefore in the city four senators, forty-four
magistrates, and four hundred representatives. The
magistrates have the same authority as in the counties.
The representatives also have the same authority; but
they never meet in one general court: They give their
votes in their particular county, or division of hundreds.
When they enact any bye-law, the greater number
of counties or divisions determines the matter. And
where these are equal, the magistrates have the casting
vote.
The magistrates chuse the mayor, sheriff, recorder,
and other officers of the city.
In the commonwealth, no representative,
magistrate, or senator, as such, has any salary. The
protector, secretaries, councils, and ambassadors, have
salaries.
The first year in every century is set apart for
correcting all inequalities, which time may have
produced in the representative. This must be done by
the legislature.
The following political aphorisms may explain the
reason of these orders.
The lower sort of people and small proprietors are
good judges enough of one not very distant from them
in rank or habitation; and therefore, in their parochial
meetings, will probably chuse the best, or nearly the
best representative: But they are wholly unfit for
county-meetings, and for electing into the higher
offices of the republic. Their ignorance gives the
grandees an opportunity of deceiving them.
"The lower sort of people and small
proprietors are good judges enough of
one not very distant from them in rank
or habitation; and therefore, in their
parochial meetings, will probably chuse
the best, or nearly the best
representative: But they are wholly
unfit for county-meetings, and for
electing into the higher offices of the
republic. Their ignorance gives the
grandees an opportunity of deceiving
them."
Ten thousand, even though they were not annually
elected, are a basis large enough for any free
government. It is true, the nobles in Poland are more
than 10,000, and yet these oppress the people. But as
power always continues there in the same persons and
families, this makes them, in a manner, a different
nation from the people. Besides the nobles are there
united under a few heads of families.
All free governments must consist of two councils,
a lesser and greater; or, in other words, of a senate and
people. The people, as Harrington observes, would
want wisdom, without the senate: The senate, without
the people, would want honesty.
6 of 12
A large assembly of 1000, for instance, to represent
the people, if allowed to debate, would fall into
disorder. If not allowed to debate, the senate has a
negative upon them, and the worst kind of negative,
that before resolution.
Here therefore is an inconvenience, which no
government has yet fully remedied, but which is the
easiest to be remedied in the world. If the people
debate, all is confusion: If they do not debate, they can
only resolve; and then the senate carves for them.
Divide the people into many separate bodies; and then
they may debate with safety, and every inconvenience
seems to be prevented.
Cardinal de Retz says, that all numerous
assemblies, however composed, are mere mob, and
swayed in their debates by the least motive.9 This we
find confirmed by daily experience. When an absurdity
strikes a member, he conveys it to his neighbour, and
so on, till the whole be infected. Separate this great
body; and though every member be only of middling
sense, it is not probable, that any thing but reason can
prevail over the whole. Influence and example being
removed, good sense will always get the better of bad
among a number of people.
There are two things to be guarded against in every
senate: Its combination, and its division. Its
combination is most dangerous. And against this
inconvenience we have provided the following
remedies. 1. The great dependence of the senators on
the people by annual elections; and that not by an
undistinguishing rabble, like the English electors, but
by men of fortune and education. 2. The small power
they are allowed. They have few offices to dispose of.
Almost all are given by the magistrates in the counties.
3. The court of competitors, which being composed of
men that are their rivals, next to them in interest, and
uneasy in their present situation, will be sure to take all
advantages against them.
The division of the senate is prevented, 1. By the
smallness of their number. 2. As faction supposes a
combination in a separate interest, it is prevented by
their dependence on the people. 3. They have a power
of expelling any factious member. It is true, when
another member of the same spirit comes from the
county, they have no power of expelling him: Nor is it
fit they should; for that shows the humour to be in the
people, and may possibly arise from some ill conduct
in public affairs. 4. Almost any man, in a senate so
regularly chosen by the people, may be supposed fit for
any civil office. It would be proper, therefore, for the
senate to form some general resolutions with regard to
the disposing of offices among the members: Which
resolutions would not confine them in critical times,
when extraordinary parts on the one hand, or
extraordinary stupidity on the other, appears in any
senator; but they would be sufficient to prevent intrigue
and faction, by making the disposal of the offices a
thing of course. For instance, let it be a resolution, That
no man shall enjoy any office, till he has sat four years
in the senate: That, except ambassadors, no man shall
be in office two years following: That no man shall
attain the higher offices but through the lower: That no
man shall be protector twice, &c. The senate of Venice
govern themselves by such resolutions.
In foreign politics the interest of the senate can
scarcely ever be divided from that of the people; and
therefore it is fit to make the senate absolute with
regard to them; otherwise there could be no secrecy or
refined policy. Besides, without money no alliance can
be executed; and the senate is still sufficiently
dependant. Not to mention, that the legislative power
being always superior to the executive, the magistrates
or representatives may interpose whenever they think
proper.
The chief support of the British government is the
opposition of interests; but that, though in the main
serviceable, breeds endless factions. In the foregoing
plan, it does all the good without any of the harm. The
competitors have no power of controlling the senate:
They have only the power of accusing, and appealing
to the people.
It is necessary, likewise, to prevent both
combination and division in the thousand magistrates.
This is done sufficiently by the separation of places and
interests.
But lest that should not be sufficient, their
dependence on the 10,000 for their elections, serves to
the same purpose.
Nor is that all: For the 10,000 may resume the
power whenever they please; and not only when they
all please, but when any five of a hundred please,
which will happen upon the very first suspicion of a
separate interest.
The 10,000 are too large a body either to unite or
divide, except when they meet in one place, and fall
under the guidance of ambitious leaders. Not to
mention their annual election, by the whole body of the
people, that are of any consideration.
A small commonwealth is the happiest government
in the world within itself, because every thing lies
under the eye of the rulers: But it may be subdued by
7 of 12
great force from without. This scheme seems to have
all the advantages both of a great and a little
commonwealth.
"A small commonwealth is the
happiest government in the world
within itself, because every thing lies
under the eye of the rulers: But it may
be subdued by great force from
without."
Every county-law may be annulled either by the
senate or another county; because that shows an
opposition of interest: In which case no part ought to
decide for itself. The matter must be referred to the
whole, which will best determine what agrees with
general interest.
As to the clergy and militia, the reasons of these
orders are obvious. Without the dependence of the
clergy on the civil magistrates, and without a militia, it
is in vain to think that any free government will ever
have security or stability.
In many governments, the inferior magistrates have
no rewards but what arise from their ambition, vanity,
or public spirit. The salaries of the French judges
amount not to the interest of the sums they pay for their
offices. The Dutch burgo-masters have little more
immediate profit than the English justices of peace, or
the members of the house of commons formerly. But
lest any should suspect, that this would beget
negligence in the administration (which is little to be
feared, considering the natural ambition of mankind),
let the magistrates have competent salaries. The
senators have access to so many honourable and
lucrative offices, that their attendance needs not be
bought. There is little attendance required of the
representatives.
That the foregoing plan of government is
practicable, no one can doubt, who considers the
resemblance that it bears to the commonwealth of the
United Provinces, a wise and renowned government.
The alterations in the present scheme seem all
evidently for the better. 1. The representation is more
equal. 2. The unlimited power of the burgo-masters in
the towns, which forms a perfect aristocracy in the
Dutch commonwealth, is corrected by a well-tempered
democracy, in giving to the people the annual election
of the county representatives. 3. The negative, which
every province and town has upon the whole body of
the Dutch republic, with regard to alliances, peace and
war, and the imposition of taxes, is here removed. 4.
The counties, in the present plan, are not so
independent of each other, nor do they form separate
bodies so much as the seven provinces; where the
jealousy and envy of the smaller provinces and towns
against the greater, particularly Holland and
Amsterdam, have frequently disturbed the government.
5. Larger powers, though of the safest kind, are
intrusted to the senate than the States-General possess;
by which means, the former may become more
expeditious, and secret in their resolutions, than it is
possible for the latter.
"That the foregoing plan of
government is practicable, no one can
doubt, who considers the resemblance
that it bears to the commonwealth of
the United Provinces, a wise and
renowned government. The alterations
in the present scheme seem all evidently
for the better."
The chief alterations that could be made on the
British government, in order to bring it to the most
perfect model of limited monarchy, seem to be the
following. First, The plan of Cromwell’s parliament
ought to be restored, by making the representation
equal, and by allowing none to vote in the county
elections who possess not a property of 200 pounds
value. Secondly, As such a house of Commons would
be too weighty for a frail house of Lords, like the
present, the Bishops and Scotch Peers ought to be
removed: The number of the upper house ought to be
raised to three or four hundred: Their seats not
hereditary, but during life: They ought to have the
election of their own members; and no commoner
should be allowed to refuse a seat that was offered him.
By this means the house of Lords would consist
entirely of the men of chief credit, abilities, and interest
in the nation; and every turbulent leader in the house of
Commons might be taken off, and connected by
interest with the house of Peers. Such an aristocracy
would be an excellent barrier both to the monarchy and
against it. At present, the balance of our government
depends in some measure on the abilities and
behaviour of the sovereign; which are variable and
uncertain circumstances.
"The plan of Cromwell’s parliament
ought to be restored, by making the
representation equal, and by allowing
none to vote in the county elections who
possess not a property of 200 pounds
value."
This plan of limited monarchy, however corrected,
seems still liable to three great inconveniencies. First,
It removes not entirely, though it may soften, the
parties of court and country. Secondly, The king’s
8 of 12
personal character must still have great influence on the
government. Thirdly, The sword is in the hands of a
single person, who will always neglect to discipline the
militia, in order to have a pretence for keeping up a
standing army.
We shall conclude this subject, with observing the
falsehood of the common opinion, that no large state,
such as France or Great Britain, could ever be
modelled into a commonwealth, but that such a form of
government can only take place in a city or small
territory. The contrary seems probable. Though it is
more difficult to form a republican government in an
extensive country than in a city; there is more facility,
when once it is formed, of preserving it steady and
uniform, without tumult and faction. It is not easy, for
the distant parts of a large state to combine in any plan
of free government; but they easily conspire in the
esteem and reverence for a single person, who, by
means of this popular favour, may seize the power, and
forcing the more obstinate to submit, may establish a
monarchical government. On the other hand, a city
readily concurs in the same notions of government, the
natural equality of property favours liberty, and the
nearness of habitation enables the citizens mutually to
assist each other. Even under absolute princes, the
subordinate government of cities is commonly
republican; while that of counties and provinces is
monarchical. But these same circumstances, which
facilitate the erection of commonwealths in cities,
render their constitution more frail and uncertain.
Democracies are turbulent. For however the people
may be separated or divided into small parties, either in
their votes or elections; their near habitation in a city
will always make the force of popular tides and
currents very sensible. Aristocracies are better adapted
for peace and order, and accordingly were most
admired by ancient writers; but they are jealous and
oppressive. In a large government, which is modelled
with masterly skill, there is compass and room enough
to refine the democracy, from the lower people, who
may be admitted into the first elections or first
concoction of the commonwealth, to the higher
magistrates, who direct all the movements. At the same
time, the parts are so distant and remote, that it is very
difficult, either by intrigue, prejudice, or passion, to
hurry them into any measures against the public
interest.
"extensive conquests, when pursued,
must be the ruin of every free
government; and of the more perfect
governments sooner than of the
imperfect; because of the very
advantages which the former possess
above the latter."
It is needless to enquire, whether such a
government would be immortal. I allow the justness of
the poet’s exclamation on the endless projects of
human race, Man and for ever!10 The world itself
probably is not immortal. Such consuming plagues
may arise as would leave even a perfect government a
weak prey to its neighbours. We know not to what
length enthusiasm, or other extraordinary movements
of the human mind, may transport men, to the neglect
of all order and public good. Where difference of
interest is removed, whimsical and unaccountable
factions often arise, from personal favour or enmity.
Perhaps, rust may grow to the springs of the most
accurate political machine, and disorder its motions.
Lastly, extensive conquests, when pursued, must be the
ruin of every free government; and of the more perfect
governments sooner than of the imperfect; because of
the very advantages which the former possess above
the latter. And though such a state ought to establish a
fundamental law against conquests; yet republics have
ambition as well as individuals, and present interest
makes men forgetful of their posterity. It is a sufficient
incitement to human endeavours, that such a
government would flourish for many ages; without
pretending to bestow, on any work of man, that
immortality, which the Almighty seems to have refused
to his own productions.
Endnotes
1.
[Christiaan Huygens (1629–95), Dutch
mathematician, astronomer, physicist, and inventor,
was one of his century’s leading men of science.
Through Colbert’s influence and with the promise of a
generous stipend, he was invited by Louis XIV in 1665
to take up residence in France, where he lived until
1681. Huygens and other scientists were enlisted to
work on problems connected with navigation and
shipbuilding as part of Colbert’s ambitious plan to
improve the French navy.]
2.
[Sir Francis Drake (1545–95) made his voyage
around the world from 1577 to 1580. Queen Elizabeth
I, who had furnished Drake with means for the voyage,
conferred the honor of knighthood on him in 1581.]
3.
[Sir Thomas More (1478–1535), for a time Lord
Chancellor under Henry VIII, later incurred the king’s
9 of 12
hostility for refusing to swear any oath that would
recognize Henry’s right to divorce Queen Catherine or
his supremacy over the church in England. More was
convicted of high treason on perjured testimony and
beheaded. In More’s Utopia, which was first published
in Latin in 1516, a fictional mariner named Raphael
Hythlodaeus recounts the details of a voyage to the
island of Utopia (literally, “no place”). The government
of Utopia resembles that sketched in Plato’s Republic
in providing for a community of goods and the rule of
the wise.]
4.
[In the discussion that follows, Hume presupposes a
familiarity with some of the distinctive institutions of
Harrington’s Commonwealth of Oceana. Harrington’s
model is an “equal commonwealth,” that is, one that
avoids those extremes of inequality that give rise to
party strife between the rich and the poor. Equality is
preserved in the “foundation” of the commonwealth by
its Agrarian Law and in the “superstructures” by its
system of rotation. The Agrarian Law prevents the
concentration of landed property in a few hands by
requiring that the owner of a large estate leave his
lands divided more or less equally among his male
heirs, if there is more than one son. The system of
rotation applies to the government of the
commonwealth, which has three orders: the senate,
consisting of men who are elected for their excellent
qualities (a “natural aristocracy”), which debates and
proposes legislation; the people, as represented by a
popular assembly, who enact legislation; and the
magistrates, who are elected for terms of one or three
years and whose function is to execute the laws. The
senate and the popular assembly are each upon a
triennial rotation or annual change in the one-third part.
The magistrates, after serving their terms, must enjoy
an interval or vacation equal to the length of the time in
office.]
5.
[The Lords of the Articles was an ancient institution
in the Scottish parliament, consisting of a committee
chosen from the three estates. The king was able to
shape the composition of the group through his
influence over the bishops, who had a decisive voice in
choosing the other members. As Hume points out in
the History of England, chapter 55, no motion could be
made in parliament without the previous consent of the
Lords of the Articles. This gave the king, in addition to
his negative after bills had passed through parliament,
another, indirectly, before their introduction. This latter
negative, in Hume’s view, was a prerogative of much
greater consequence than the former; and “the nation,
properly speaking, could not be said to enjoy any
regular freedom” until the Lords of the Articles was
abolished, first in 1641 and finally in 1690.]
6.
[Niccolò Machiavelli, Discorsi sopra la Prima
Deca di Tito Livio (Discourses on the first ten books of
Titus Livy), bk. 3, chap. 1. The Discourses, which was
probably written between 1513 and 1518, was
published posthumously in 1531. The first English
translation was published in 1636.]
7.
[The usual method by which the Great Council of
Venice elected magistrates was as follows: “Three urns
were placed in front of the ducal throne, those on the
right and left containing half as many balls each as
there were members present, all the balls being white
with the exception of thirty in each urn which were of
gold. In the middle urn were sixty balls, thirty-six gold
and twenty-four white. The office to be filled having
been announced to the Great Council, the members
drew from the urns on the right and left. Those who
drew white resumed their seats, the sixty who drew
gold drew again from the middle urn. Of the sixty, the
twenty-four who drew white resumed their seats, the
thirty-six who drew gold became electors. They then
divided themselves by lot into four groups of nine
each. The groups retired separately, and each
nominated a candidate for the vacant office, six votes
being required for nomination. The four candidates
thus nominated were then presented to the Great
Council and voted for by that body, a plurality electing.
No two members of any family were permitted to serve
as electors for the same vacancy. If all four groups of
electors agreed on the same candidate, he was declared
elected without the formality of a ballot.” See George
B. McClellan, The Oligarchy of Venice (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Co., 1904), pp. 159–60. John
Adams, who describes the Venetian ballot in his
Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the
United States of America, vol. 1, chap. 2, calls it “a
complicated mixture of choice and chance.” Harrington
adopted the Venetian Ballot in his Commonwealth of
Oceana.]
8.
[From the late thirteenth century onward, the
cantons that made up the Swiss Confederation were
pledged to use their militias for mutual defense, and
this citizen army was notably successful in maintaining
the country’s independence against foreign enemies.
These militias were formed on the principle that all
10 of 12
able-bodied males are liable to military service and
should receive arms and regular training. For an
elaboration of the argument that a militia on the Swiss
model is the appropriate military system for a republic,
see Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Considerations on the
Government of Poland, chap. 12.]
9.
[See Jean-François-Paul de Gondi, Cardinal de Retz
(1614–79), Mémoires, in Œuvres, nouvelle éd. (Paris:
Hachette, 1870–96), 2:422. While assistant to his
uncle, the archbishop of Paris, Gondi was one of the
leaders of the Fronde (1648–53), a rebellion against the
government of Anne of Austria, regent for her son,
Louis XIV, and her minister, Cardinal Mazarin. Gondi
became cardinal in 1652 and afterward styled himself
Cardinal de Retz. His Mémoires were first published in
1717. An English translation appeared in 1723.]
10.
[The editor could not establish the identity of the
poet cited here by Hume. The point of the poet’s
exclamation seems to be that while man forever strives
for perfection or permanence, his works are ever
perishable. This may be another instance in which
Hume paraphrases his source loosely rather than
quoting it exactly. If so, possible sources might be
Horace, Satires 2.8.62, or Lucretius, The Nature of
Things 2.76 or 5.1430–31. Hume includes both Horace
and Lucretius in his list of the great poets (see “Of the
Middle Station of Life,” p. 550, under “Essays
Withdrawn and Unpublished”).]
11 of 12
Further Information
Source
David Hume, Essays Moral, Political, Literary, edited
and with a Foreword, Notes, and Glossary by Eugene
F. Miller, with an appendix of variant readings from the
1889 edition by T.H. Green and T.H. Grose, revised
edition (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund 1987). Part II,
Essay XVI: Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth.
<http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles
/704#lf0059_label_827>.
Further Reading on Hume
Other works by David Hume (1711-1776):
<http://oll.libertyfund.org/people/david-hume>
School of Thought: The Scottish Enlightenment:
<http://oll.libertyfund.org/groups/19>.
Introductions to the OLL Collection
Quotations about Liberty and Power. Each week a
new quote is added to the front page of the OLL. It
highlights a key idea about liberty or power by one of
our authors. The collection now totals over 500 quotes
which are categorized by topics such as free trade,
money, abolition, law, literature, politics, war & peace,
despots, etc. <oll.libertyfund.org/quotes>.
The OLL Reader is an anthology of some of the
most important material in the Online Library of
Liberty. They are chapter length extracts which have
been formatted as pamphlets in PDF, ePub, and Kindle
formats for easier distribution. These extracts are
designed for use in the classroom and discussion
groups, or material for a literature table for outreach.
The full list can be found here
<oll.libertyfund.org/pages/best-of-the-oll>.
Copyright and Fair Use
The copyright to this material is held by Liberty
Fund unless otherwise indicated. It is made available to
further the educational goals of Liberty Fund, Inc. and
may be used freely for educational and academic
purposes. It may not be used in any way for profit.
About the the OLL & Liberty Fund
The Online Library of Liberty is a project of Liberty
Fund, Inc., a private educational foundation established
in 1960 to encourage the study of the ideal of a society
of free and responsible individuals. The Foundation
develops, supervises, and finances its own educational
activities to foster thought and encourage discourse on
enduring intellectual issues pertaining to liberty.
The OLL website has a large collection of books
and study guides about individual liberty, limited
constitutional government, the free market, and peace.
It makes these resources available at no charge to the
public for educational purposes. The OLL has won a
number of international awards and recognition from
such bodies as the Library of Congress (we were
selected for the Minerva Arching Project), the National
Endowment for the Humanities, and the British Arts &
Humanities Research Council.
Liberty Fund: <www.libertyfund.org>
OLL: <oll.libertyfund.org>.
12 of 12
