The Principles of Political Right (1791)1
The establishment of a Civil Constitution in
society is one of the most important facts in human
history. In the principle on which it is founded this
institution differs from all the other forms of social
union among mankind. Viewed as a compact,[1] and
compared with other modes of compact[2] by which
numbers of men are united into one Society, the
formation of a Civil Constitution has much in
common with all other forms of Social Union in
respect of the mode in which it is carried out in
practice. But while all such compacts are established for
the purpose of promoting in common some chosen
End, the Civil Union is essentially distinguished from
all others, by the principle on which it is based. In all
social contracts we find a union of a number of
persons for the purpose of carrying out some one End
which they all have in common. But a Union of a
multitude of men, viewed as an end in itself that every
person ought to carry out, and which consequently is a
primary and unconditional duty amid all the external
relations of men who cannot help exercising a mutual
influence on one another,—is at once peculiar and
unique of its kind. Such a Union is only to be found in
a Society which, by being formed into a Civil State,
constitutes a Commonwealth. Now the End which in
such external relations is itself a duty and even the
highest formal condition—the conditio sine quâ non—of
all other external duties, is the realisation of the Rights
of Men under public compulsory Laws, by which every
individual can have what is his own assigned to him,
and secured against the encroachments or assaults of
others.
The idea of an external Right, however, arises
wholly out of the idea of human Freedom or Liberty,
in the external relations of men to one another. As
such, it has nothing specially to do with the realisation
of Happiness as a purpose which all men naturally
have, or with prescription of the means of attaining it;
and it is absolutely necessary that this End shall not be
mixed up with the Laws of Right as their motive. Right
in general, may be defined as the limitation of the
Freedom of any individual to the extent of its
agreement with the freedom of all other individuals, in
so far as this is possible by a universal Law. Public
Right, again, is the sum of the external Laws which
make such a complete agreement of freedom in
Society possible. Now as all limitation of freedom by
external acts of the will of another, is a mode of coercion
or compulsion, it follows that the Civil Constitution is a
relation of free men who live under coercive Laws,
without prejudicing their liberty otherwise in the whole
of their connection with others. For, Reason itself wills
this. By ‘Reason’ is here meant the pure innate lawgiving, Reason which gives no regard to any End that is
derived from experience, such as are all comprehended
under the general name of Happiness. In respect of
any such End or in what any individual may place it,
men may think quite differently, so that their wills
could not be brought under any common principle,
nor, consequently, under any External Laws that would
be compatible with the liberty of all.
“The idea of an external Right,
however, arises wholly out of the idea
of human Freedom or Liberty, in the
external relations of men to one
another. As such, it has nothing
specially to do with the realisation of
Happiness as a purpose which all men
naturally have, or with prescription of
the means of attaining it; and it is
absolutely necessary that this End
shall not be mixed up with the Laws of
Right as their motive.”
The Civil State, then, regarded merely as a social
state that is regulated by laws of right, is founded upon
the following rational principles:—
1. The Liberty of every Member of the Society as
a Man;
3
1 Immanuel Kant, Kant’s Principles of Politics, including his essay on Perpetual Peace. A Contribution to Political Science, trans. W. Hastie
(Edinburgh: Clark, 1891). Chapter: II. The Principles of Political Right considered in connection with the Relation of Theory to
Practice in the Right of the State. <oll.libertyfund.org/title/358/56090>.
2. The Equality of every Member of the Society
with every other, as a Subject;
3. The Self-dependency of every Member of the
Commonwealth, as a Citizen.
These Principles are not so much Laws given by
the State when it is established, as rather fundamental
conditions according to which alone the institution of a
State is possible, in conformity with the pure rational
Principles of external Human Right generally.
“No one has a right to compel me to be
happy in the peculiar way in which he
may think of the well-being of other
men; but everyone is entitled to seek
his own happiness in the way that
seems to him best, if it does not
infringe the liberty of others in striving
after a similar end for themselves”
1. The Liberty of every Member of the State as a
Man, is the first Principle in the constitution of a
rational Commonwealth. I would express this Principle
in the following form:—‘No one has a right to compel
me to be happy in the peculiar way in which he may
think of the well-being of other men; but everyone is
entitled to seek his own happiness in the way that
seems to him best, if it does not infringe the liberty of
others in striving after a similar end for themselves
when their Liberty is capable of consisting with the
Right of Liberty in all others according to possible
universal laws.’—A Government founded upon the
principle of Benevolence towards the people—after the
analogy of a father to his children, and therefore called
a paternal Government—would be one in which the
Subjects would be regarded as children or minors
unable to distinguish what is beneficial or injurious to
them. These subjects would be thus compelled to act in
a merely passive way; and they would be trained to
expect solely from the Judgment of the Sovereign and
just as he might will it, merely out of his goodness, all
that ought to make them happy. Such a Government
would be the greatest conceivable Despotism; for it
would present a Constitution that would abolish all
Liberty in the Subjects and leave them no Rights. It is
not a paternal Government, but only a patriotic
Government that is adapted for men who are capable
of Rights, and at the same time fitted to give scope to
the good-will of the ruler. By ‘patriotic’ is meant that
condition of mind in which everyone in the State—the
Head of it not excepted—regards the Commonwealth
as the maternal bosom, and the country as the paternal
soil out of and on which he himself has sprung into
being, and which he also must leave to others as a dear
inheritance. Thus, and thus only, can he hold himself
entitled to protect the Rights of his fatherland by laws
of the common will, but not to subject it to an
unconditional purpose of his own at pleasure.—This
Right of Liberty thus belongs to him as a man, while
he is a Member of the Commonwealth; or, in point of
fact, so far as he is a being capable of rights generally.
2. The Equality of every member of the State as a
subject, is the second Principle in the Constitution of a
rational Commonwealth. The formula of this Principle
may be put thus:—‘Every Member of the
Commonwealth has rights against every other that may
be enforced by compulsory Laws, from which only the
Sovereign or Supreme Ruler of the State is excepted,
because he is regarded not as a mere Member of the
Commonwealth, but as its Creator or Maintainer; and
he alone has the Right to compel without being himself
subject to compulsory Law.’ All, however, who live under
Laws in a State, are its subjects; and, consequently, they
are subjected to the compulsory Law, like all other
members of the Commonwealth, one only, whether an
individual Sovereign or a collective body, constituting
the Supreme Head of the State, and as such being
accepted as the medium through which alone all
rightful coercion or compulsion can be exercised. For,
should the Head of the State also be subject to
compulsion, there would no longer be a Supreme
Head, and the series of members subordinate and
superordinate would go on upwards ad infinitum. Again,
were there in the State two such powers as persons
exempt from legal compulsion, neither of them would
be subject to compulsory Laws, and as such the one
could do no wrong to the other; which is impossible.
This thoroughgoing Equality of the individual
men in a State as its subjects, is, however, quite
compatible with the greatest Inequality in the extent and
degrees of their possessions, whether consisting in
corporeal or spiritual superiority over others, or in the
external gifts of fortune, or in rights generally—of
which there may be many—in relation to others. Thus
4
the prosperity of the one may greatly depend on the
will of another, as in the case of the poor in relation to
the rich. One may even have of necessity to obey and
another to command, as in the relation of children to
parents, and of wife to husband. Again, one may have
to work and another to pay, as in the case of a day
labourer; and so on. But in relation to the involved law
of Right, which as the expression of the universal Will
of the State can be only one, and which regards the
form of the Right, and not the matter or object to
which the Right refers: in all cases, the persons as
Subjects, are to be regarded as all equal to one another.
For no one has a right to compel or coerce anyone
whomsoever in the State, otherwise than by the public
Law and through the Sovereign or Ruler executing it;
and anyone may resist another thus far, and through
the same medium. On the other hand, no one can lose
this right, as a title to proceed by legal compulsion
against others, except by his own fault or a criminal
act. Nor can anyone divest himself of it voluntarily, or
by a compact, so as to bring it about by a supposed act
of Right, that he should have no rights but only duties
towards others; for in so doing he would be depriving
himself of the right of making a compact, and
consequently the act would annual itself.
“Every Member of the State should
have it made possible for him to attain
to any position or rank that may belong
to any subject, to which his talent, his
industry or his fortune may be capable
of raising him; and his fellow-subjects
are not entitled to stand in the way by
any hereditary prerogative, forming the
exclusive privilege of a certain class, in
order to keep him and his posterity for
ever below them.”
Out of this idea of the Equality of men as
Subjects in the Commonwealth, there arises the
following formula:—‘Every Member of the State
should have it made possible for him to attain to any
position or rank that may belong to any subject, to
which his talent, his industry or his fortune may be
capable of raising him; and his fellow-subjects are not
entitled to stand in the way by any hereditary
prerogative, forming the exclusive privilege of a certain
class, in order to keep him and his posterity for ever
below them.’
For, all Right just consists in restriction of the
Liberty of another to the condition that is consistent
with my Liberty according to a universal Law; and
Public Right in a Commonwealth is only the product
of actual legislation conformable to this principle and
conjoined with power, in virtue of which all who
belong to a nation as its subjects find themselves in a
rightful state—status juridicus—constituted and
regulated by law. And, as such, this state is in fact a
condition of Equality, inasmuch as it is determined by
the action and reaction of free-wills limiting one
another, according to the universal law of Freedom;
and it thus constitutes the Civil State of human Society.
Hence the inborn Right of all individuals in this sphere
(that is considered as being prior to their having
actually entered upon juridical action) to bring
compulsion to bear upon any others, is entirely identical
and equal throughout, on the assumption that they are
always to remain within the bounds of unanimity and
concord in the mutual use of their Liberty. Now birth is
not an act on the part of him who is born, and
consequently it does not entail upon him any inequality
in the state of Right, nor any subjection under laws of
compulsion other than what is common to him, with
all others, as a subject of the one supreme legislative
Power; and, therefore, there can be no inborn privilege
by way of Right in any member of the
Commonwealth as a subject, before another fellowsubject. Nor, consequently has anyone a right to
transmit the privilege or prerogative of the Rank which
he holds in the Commonwealth to his posterity so that
they should be, as it were, qualified by birth for the
rank of nobility; nor should they be prevented from
attaining to the higher stages in the gradations of social
rank, by their own merit. Everything else that partakes
of the nature of a thing and does not relate to
personality, may be bequeathed; and, since such things
may be acquired as property, they may also be
alienated or disponed. Hence after a number of
generations a considerable inequality in external
circumstances may arise among the members of a
Commonwealth, producing such relations as those of
5
Master and Servant, Landlord and Tenant, etc. These
circumstances and relations, however, ought not to
hinder any of the subjects of the State from rising to
such positions as their talent, their industry, and their
fortune may make it possible for them to fill. For,
otherwise such a one would be qualified to coerce
without being liable to be coerced by the counter
action of others in return; and he would rise above the
stage of being a fellow-subject. Further, no man who
lives under the legalised conditions of a
Commonwealth, can fall out of this equality otherwise
than by his own crime, and never either by compact or
through any military occupancy.[3] For he cannot by
any legal act, whether of himself or of another, cease
to be the owner of himself, or enter into the class of
domestic cattle, which are used for all sorts of services
at will and are maintained in this condition without
their consent as long as there is a will to do it, although
under the limitation—which is sometimes sanctioned
even by religion, as among the Hindoos—that they are
not to be mutilated or slain. Under any conditions, he
is to be regarded as happy who is conscious that it
depends only on himself—that is on his faculty or
earnest will—or on circumstances which he cannot
impute to any other, and not on the irresistible will of
others, that he does not rise to a stage of Equality with
others who as his fellow-subjects have no advantage
over him as far as Right is concerned.
“he cannot by any legal act, whether of
himself or of another, cease to be the
owner of himself, or enter into the
class of domestic cattle, which are used
for all sorts of services at will and are
maintained in this condition without
their consent as long as there is a will
to do it”
3. The Self-dependency [4] of a member of the
Commonwealth as a citizen, or fellow-legislator, is the
third principle or condition of Right in the State. In
the matter of the legislation itself, all are to be regarded
as free and equal under the already existing public Laws;
but they are not to be all regarded as equal in relation
to the right to give or enact these laws. Those who are
not capable of this right are, notwithstanding,
subjected to the observance of the laws as members of
the Commonwealth, and thereby they participate in
the protection which is in accordance therewith; they
are, however, not to be regarded as Citizens but as
protected fellow-subjects.—All right, in fact, depends
on the laws. A public law, however, which determines
for all what is to be legally allowed or not allowed in
their regard, is the act of a public Will, from which all
right proceeds and which therefore itself can do no
wrong to anyone. For this, however, there is no other
Will competent than that of the whole people, as it is
only when all determine about all that each one in
consequence determines about himself. For it is only to
himself that one can do no wrong. But if it be another
will that is in question, then the mere will of anyone
different from it, could determine nothing for it which
might not be wrong; and consequently the law of such
a will would require another law to limit its legislation.
And thus no particular will can be legislative for a
Commonwealth.—Properly speaking, in order to make
out this, the ideas of the external Liberty, Equality, and
Unity of the will of all, are to be taken into account;
and for the last of these Self-dependency is the condition,
since the exercising of a vote is required when the
former two ideas are taken along with it. The
fundamental law thus indicated, which can only arise
out of the universal united will of the people, is what is
called the ‘Original Contract.’
“the individual is his own master by
right (sui juris); and, consequently, that
he has some property that supports
him,—under which may be reckoned
any art or handicraft, or any fine art or
science. Otherwise put, the condition in
those cases in which the citizen must
acquire from others in order to live, is
that he only acquires it by alienation of
what is his own, and not by a consent
6
given to others to make use of his
powers”
Now anyone who has the right of voting in this
system of Legislation, is a Citizen as distinguished from
a Burgess; he is a citoyen as distinguished from a
bourgeois. The quality requisite for this status, in
addition to the natural one of not being a child or a
woman,—is solely this, that the individual is his own
master by right (sui juris); and, consequently, that he has
some property that supports him,—under which may
be reckoned any art or handicraft, or any fine art or
science. Otherwise put, the condition in those cases in
which the citizen must acquire from others in order to
live, is that he only acquires it by alienation of what is
his own, and not by a consent given to others to make
use of his powers; and consequently that he serves no
one but the Commonwealth, in the proper sense of the
term. In this relation those who are skilled in the arts,
and large or small proprietors, are all equal to one
another; as in fact each one is entitled only to one vote.
As regards Proprietors, the question might be
considered as to how it may have happened by right
that anyone has got as his own more land than he can
himself use with his own hands (for acquisition by
military occupation is not primary acquisition); and
how it has happened that many men, who otherwise
might have altogether been able to acquire an
independent possession, have been brought to the
position of merely serving such a one in order to be
able to live. But without entering here upon the
consideration of this question, it is manifest that it
would at once be contrary to the previous principle of
Equality, if a law were to invest such persons with the
privilege of a class, so that their descendants should
either always continue to be great proprietors of land
—in the manner of fiefs—without such being able to
be sold or divided by inheritance, and thus coming to
be applied for the use of more of the people; or if, even
in carrying out such divisions, that no one but he who
belonged to a certain class, arbitrarily regulated in this
connection, could acquire any part of such land. The
great possessor of an estate, does in fact annihilate as
many smaller owners and their voices as might occupy
the place he takes up; he does not vote in their name,
and he has consequently only one vote. It thus must be
left to depend merely on the means, the industry, and
the fortune of each member of the Commonwealth,
that each one may acquire a part of it, and all of its
members the whole. But these distinctions cannot be
brought into consideration in connection with a
universal Legislation; and hence the number of those
qualified to have a voice in the legislation, must be
reckoned by the heads of those who are in possession
and not according to the extent of their possessions.
Furthermore, all who have this right of voting
must agree in order to realise the Laws of public
justice, for otherwise there would arise a conflict of
right between those who were not in agreement with it,
and the others who were; and this would give rise to
the need of a higher principle of right that the conflict
might be decided. A universal agreement cannot be
expected from a whole people; and consequently it is
only a plurality of voices, and not even of those who
immediately vote in a large nation, but only of their
delegates as representative of the people that can alone
be foreseen as practically attainable. And hence, even
the principle of making the majority of votes suffice as
representing the general consent, will have to be taken
as by compact; and it must thus be regarded as the
ultimate basis of the establishment of any Civil
Constitution.
“A universal agreement cannot be
expected from a whole people; and
consequently it is only a plurality of
voices, and not even of those who
immediately vote in a large nation, but
only of their delegates as representative
of the people that can alone be foreseen
as practically attainable.”
We have next to consider what follows by way of
Corollary from the principles thus enunciated. We have
before us the idea of an ‘Original Contract’ as the only
condition upon which a civil and, therefore, wholly
rightful, constitution can be founded among men, and
as the only basis upon which a State can be established.
But this fundamental condition—whether called an
‘original contract’ or a ‘social compact’—may be
viewed as the coalition of all the private and particular
wills of a people into one common and public Will,
7
having a purely juridical legislation as its end. But it is
not necessary to presuppose this contract or compact,
to have been actually a fact; nor indeed is it possible as
a fact. We have not to deal with it as if it had first to be
proved from history that a people into whose rights and
obligations we have entered as their descendants, did
actually on a certain occasion execute such a contract,
and that a certain evidence or instrument regarding it
of an oral or written kind, must have been transmitted
so as to constitute an obligation that shall be binding in
any existing civil constitution. In short, this idea is
merely an idea of Reason; but it has undoubtedly a
practical reality. For it ought to bind every legislator by
the condition that he shall enact such laws as might
have arisen from the united will of a whole people; and
it will likewise be binding upon every subject, in so far
as he will be a citizen, so that he shall regard the Law
as if he had consented to it of his own will. This is the
test of the rightfulness of every public law. If the law
be of such a nature that it is impossible that the whole
people could give their assent to it, it is not a just law.
An instance of this kind would be a law, enacting that a
certain class of subjects should have all the privileges of
hereditary rank by mere birth. But if it be merely
possible that a people could consent to a law, it is a duty
to regard it as just, even supposing that the people were
at the moment in such a position or mood, that if it
were referred to them, their consent to it would
probably be refused. [5]
“In regard to the interest of happiness,
no principle that could be universally
applicable, can be laid down for the
guidance of legislation; for not only the
circumstances of the time, but the very
contradictory and ever-changing
opinions which men have of what will
constitute happiness, make it
impossible to lay down fixed principles
regarding it; and so the idea of
Happiness, taken by itself, is not
available as a principle of legislation.”
This limitation, however, manifestly applies only to
the judgment of the Legislator and not to that of the
Subject. If, then, under a certain actual state of the law,
a people should conclude that the continuance of that
law would probably take away their happiness, what
would they have to do? Would it not be a duty to resist
the law? The answer can only be that the people
should do nothing but obey. For the question here does
not turn upon the happiness which the subject may
expect from some special institution or mode of
administering the Commonwealth, but the primary
concern is purely that of the Right which has thus to
be secured to every individual. This is the supreme
principle from which all the maxims relating to the
Commonwealth must proceed; and it cannot be limited
by anything else. In regard to the interest of happiness,
no principle that could be universally applicable, can
be laid down for the guidance of legislation; for not
only the circumstances of the time, but the very
contradictory and ever-changing opinions which men
have of what will constitute happiness, make it
impossible to lay down fixed principles regarding it;
and so the idea of Happiness, taken by itself, is not
available as a principle of legislation. No one can
prescribe for another as to what he shall find happiness
in. The principle, salus publica suprema civitatis lex est,
remains undiminished in value and authority; and the
public weal, which has first of all to be taken into
consideration, is just the maintenance of that legal
constitution by which the liberty of all is secured
through the laws. Along with this, the individual is left
undisturbed in his right to seek his happiness in
whatever way may seem to him best, if only he does
not infringe the universal liberty secured through the
law, by violating the rights of other fellow subjects.
When the sovereign Power enacts laws which are
directed primarily towards the happiness of the
citizens, out of regard to their well-being, the state of
the population and such like, this is not done from its
being the end for which the civil constitution is
established, but merely as a means of securing the state
of Right, especially against the external enemies of the
people. The Government must be capable of judging,
and has alone to judge, whether such legislation
belongs to the constitution of the Commonwealth, and
whether it is requisite in order to secure its strength and
steadfastness, both within itself and against foreign
enemies; but this is not to be done as if the aim were to
8
make the people happy even against their will, but only
to bring it about that they shall exist as a
Commonwealth.[6] In thus judging whether any such
measure can be taken prudently or not, the legislator
may indeed err. But he does not err in so far as he
considers whether the law does or does not agree with
a principle of Right.
And in doing so he has an infallible criterion in the
idea of the ‘original contract,’ viewed as an essential
idea of reason; and hence he does not require—as
would be the case with the principle of happiness—to
wait for experience to instruct him about the utility
rather than the rightness of his proposed measure. For
if it is only not contradictory in itself that a whole
people should agree to such a law, however unpleasant
may be its results in fact, it would as such be
conformable to Right. If a public law be thus
conformable to Right, it is irreprehensible, and hence it
will give the right to coerce; and, on the other hand, it
would involve the prohibition of active resistance to the
will of the legislator. The power in the State which
gives effect to the law, is likewise irresistible; and no
rightful commonwealth exists without such a power to
suppress all internal resistance to it. For, such resistance
would proceed according to a rule which if made
universal would destroy all civil constitutionalism, and
would annihilate the only state in which men can live
in the actual possession of rights.
“Hence it follows that all resistance to
the Sovereign Legislative Power, every
kind of instigation to bring the
discontent of the subjects into active
form, and rebellion or insurrection of
every degree and kind, constitute the
highest and most punishable crimes in
the commonwealth; for they would
destroy its very foundations.”
Hence it follows that all resistance to the Sovereign
Legislative Power, every kind of instigation to bring the
discontent of the subjects into active form, and
rebellion or insurrection of every degree and kind,
constitute the highest and most punishable crimes in
the commonwealth; for they would destroy its very
foundations. The prohibition of them is therefore
absolute; so that even if the Supreme Power, or the
Sovereign as its agent, were to violate the original
contract, and thereby in the judgment of the subject to
lose the right of making the laws, yet as the
Government has been empowered to proceed even
thus tyrannically, no right of resistance can be allowed
to the subject as a power antagonistic to the State. The
reason of this is that in the actually existing Civil
Constitution the people have no longer the right to
determine by their judgment how it is to be
administered. For suppose they had such a right, and
that it was directly opposed to the judgment of the
actual Head of the State, who would there be to decide
with which of them the right lay? Evidently neither of
them could do this, as it makes them judges in their
own cause. There would therefore have to be another
sovereign Head above the sovereign Head to decide
between it and the people, but this is a contradiction.
Nor can some supposed right of necessity—which is at
best a spurious thing, such as is the fancied right to do
wrong in an extreme physical necessity—come in here
as a lever for the removal of the barrier thus limiting
the voluntary power of the people. For the Head of the
State may just as well think to justify his hard
procedure against the subjects by the fact of their
obstinacy and intractability, as they to justify their
revolt by complaining against him about their undue
suffering. Who shall decide between them? It is only he
who is in possession of the supreme public
administration of right, or who is otherwise the Head
of the State, who can do this; and no one in the
commonwealth can have the right to contest his
possession of the power to do it. Nevertheless I find
excellent men asserting such a right on the part of the
Subject to resist the higher authority under certain
circumstances. Among these I shall only now refer to
Achenwall, a very cautious, distinct, and careful writer.
In his doctrine of Natural Right he says: ‘If the danger
which threatens the commonwealth from longer
toleration of the injustice of the sovereign, is greater
than what may be anticipated from taking up arms,
then the people may resist such a sovereign; and in
order to maintain their rights they may break their
compact of submission and dethrone him as a tyrant.’
And hence he infers that in this way the people return
9
to the state of Nature in relation to their previous
Head.
I am willing to believe that neither Achenwall nor
any of the worthy men who agree with him in this sort
of reasoning, would have ever given their advice or
consent in any case to enterprises of so dangerous a
nature. Nor can it well be doubted that if the
revolutions by which Switzerland, the United
Netherlands, and even Great Britain acquired the
political Constitutions now so celebrated, had failed,
the readers of history would have seen in the execution
of the leaders now so highly lauded, only the
punishment deserved by great political criminals. The
result thus usually becomes intermingled with our
judgment of the principles of right in question,
although the former is always uncertain in fact,
whereas the latter are always certain in themselves. It
is, however, clear that as regards these principles the
people by their mode of seeking to assert their rights
commit the greatest wrong, even if it be admitted that
the rebellion might do no wrong to the ruling sovereign
who had violated the actual compact upon which his
relation to the people was founded in a sort of joyeuse
entrée. For if this mode of conduct were adopted as a
maxim, all rightful political Constitution would be
made uncertain and a natural state of utter lawlessness
would be introduced, in which all right at least would
cease to have effect.—With regard to this tendency in
so many thoughtful writers to encourage the people to
their own detriment, I will only observe that there are
two influences commonly at work in determining it. It
is partly caused by the common illusion which
substitutes the principle of Happiness as the criterion
of judgment, when the principle of Right is really in
question. And again, where there is no record of
anything like a compact actually proposed to the
Commonwealth, or accepted by the Sovereign, or
sanctioned by both, these thinkers have assumed the
idea of an ‘original Contract’ which is always involved
in reason, as a thing which must have actually
happened; and thus they supposed that the right was
always reserved to the people in the case of any gross
violation of it in their judgment, to resile from it at
pleasure.[7]
“The sovereign acting on this principle
(of Happiness) determines to make the
people happy according to his notions,
and he becomes a despot. The people
will not give up their common human
claim to what they consider their own
happiness, and they become rebels.”
It thus becomes evident that the principle of
Happiness, which is properly incapable of any definite
determination as a principle, may be the occasion of
much evil in the sphere of political Right, just as it is in
the sphere of morals. And this will hold good even with
the best intentions on the part of those who teach and
inculcate it. The sovereign acting on this principle
determines to make the people happy according to his
notions, and he becomes a despot. The people will not
give up their common human claim to what they
consider their own happiness, and they become rebels.
Now if at the outset it had been asked what is right and
just by regard to the established principles of reason,
without regard to the notions of the empiric, the idea
underlying the theory of the social compact would
always have incontestable authority. But it would not be
correct to treat it as an empirical fact, as Danton would
have it; for he thought that apart from this fact all
rights found in any existing civil constitution and all
property, would have to be declared null and void. The
idea in question is only to be taken as a rational
principle for the estimation and judgment of all the
public rights existing under a political constitution. And
so regarded, it then becomes evident that, prior to the
existence of a common Will, the people possess no
right of coercion in relation to their ruler, because they
can only bring such coercion to bear as a matter of
right through him. And when this Will does exist, no
coercion can be exercised by the people against him,
because this would make them to be themselves the
supreme ruler. Hence a right of compulsion or
coercion in the form of a resistance in word or deed
against the sovereign Head of the State, can never
belong of right to the people.
Further, we see this theory sufficiently confirmed
in practice. In the constitution of Great Britain the
people form such an important element that it is
represented as a model for the whole world, and yet we
find that it is entirely silent about any right pertaining
to the people in case the monarch should transgress the
10
contract of 1688; and, consequently, since there is no
law upon the subject, if there is any right of rebellion
against him should he violate the constitution, it can
only be there by secret reservation. For, it would be a
manifest contradiction that the constitution should
contain a law providing for such a case. That would be
to justify the overthrow of the subsisting constitution
from which all particular laws arise; which would be
absurd, even on the supposition that the contract was
violated. Such a constitution would be contradictory
for this reason that it would necessarily have to include
a publicly constituted counter power, which consequently
would be a second sovereign in the State, and its
function would be to protect the rights of the people
against the other sovereign.[8] But the existence of this
second Sovereign would likewise require a third whose
function would be to decide between these two and to
determine on which side right and justice lay.—Hence
such guides, or rather, let us say, guardians of the
people, perplexed by the possibility of such an
accusation should their enterprise fail in any way, have
rather contrived, for the behoof of a monarch who
might be scared away by them, a voluntary power of
demitting the gover nment than claimed a
presumptuous right of deposition. But this view
manifestly puts the constitution into contradiction with
itself. Now if, in presence of these assertions, the
objection is not raised against me, as it certainly should
not, that I flatter the monarch too much by this view of
his inviolability, I may hope to be also spared another
objection from the opposite side. In a word, I hope to
be spared the contrary objection that I assert too much
in favour of the people, when I say that they have also
their own inalienable rights as against the sovereign of
the State, although these cannot be justly regarded as
rights of coercion or constraint.
“every man must be held to have his
own inalienable rights which he cannot
give up though he wish to do it, and
about which he is himself entitled to
judge. But ... to assume that the
Sovereign Power can never err, or never
be ignorant of anything, would amount
to regarding that Power as favoured
with heavenly inspiration and as
exalted above the reach of mankind,
which is absurd. Hence the Liberty of
the Press, is the sole palladium of the
rights of the people.”
Hobbes is of the opposite opinion. In his view the
sovereign as Head of the State is bound in nothing to
the people by compact and can do no wrong to the
citizens, however he act towards them. This
proposition would be quite correct, if by ‘wrong’ we
understand that kind of lesion which allows to the
injured party a right of coercion against the one who
does the wrong. So it is in the special relation, but taken
generally the proposition is repulsive and appalling.
Any Subject who is not utterly intractable, must be able
to suppose that his Sovereign does not really wish to do
him wrong. Moreover, every man must be held to have
his own inalienable rights which he cannot give up
though he wish to do it, and about which he is himself
entitled to judge. But the wrong in question which in
his opinion is done to him, occurs according to that
view only from error or ignorance of certain
consequences that will ensue from the laws laid down
by the sovereign power. Consequently the right must be
conceded to the citizen, and with the direct consent of
the sovereign, that he shall be able to make his opinion
publicly known regarding what appears to him to be a
wrong committed against the Commonwealth by the
enactments and administration of the Sovereign. For to
assume that the Sovereign Power can never err, or
never be ignorant of anything, would amount to
regarding that Power as favoured with heavenly
inspiration and as exalted above the reach of mankind,
which is absurd. Hence the Liberty of the Press, is the sole
palladium of the rights of the people. But it must be
exercised within the limits of reverence and love for the
constitution as it exists, while it must be sustained by
the liberal spirit of the subjects, which the constitution
itself tends to inspire; and it must be so limited by the
wise precautions of those who exercise it that their
freedom be not lost. To refuse this Liberty to the people
amounts to taking from them all claim to right in
relation to the supreme Power; and this is the view of
11
Hobbes. But more than this is involved. As the will of
the Sovereign only commands the subjects as citizens
on the ground that he represents the general will of the
people, to deprive the people of this liberty would be to
withdraw from the Sovereign power all knowledge of
what he would himself alter if he only knew it; and it
would thus put him into contradiction with himself.
Moreover to instil an anxiety into the sovereign that
independent thinking and public utterance of it, would
of themselves excite trouble in the State, would amount
to exciting distrust against his own power or even
awakening hatred against the people. There is then a
general principle according to which the people may
assert their rights negatively, so far as merely to judge
that a certain thing is to be regarded as not ordained by
the supreme legislation in accordance with their best
will. This principle may be expressed in the following
proposition: What a People could not ordain over itself, ought
not to be ordained by the Legislator over the People.
For example, the question may be raised as to
whether a Law, enacting that a certain regulated
ecclesiastical constitution shall exist permanently and
for all time, can be regarded as issuing from the proper
will of the Lawgiver according to his real intention. In
dealing with it, the position which first arises, is
whether a people may make a law to itself to the effect
that certain dogmas and external forms of religion,
when once adopted, shall continue to be adopted for all
time; and, therefore, whether it may prevent itself in its
own descendants from advancing further in religious
insight, or from altering any old errors when they have
become recognised as such? It will thus become clear,
that an ‘original contract’ of the people which made
such a position a law, would be in itself null and void,
because it is inconsistent with the essential destination
and purposes of mankind. Consequently, a law enacted
to such an effect, is not to be regarded as the proper
will of the monarch; and counter representations may
therefore be made to him against it. In all cases,
however, even when such things have been ordained by
the supreme legislation, resistance is not to be offered
to them in word or in deed, but they are only to be
opposed by the influence of general and public
judgments.
In every Commonwealth there must be obedience to
coercive laws relating to the whole people and
regulated by the mechanism of the political
constitution. But at the same time there must be a Spirit
of Liberty among the people; for every one needs to be
convinced by reason in things relating to universal
human duty, that such coercion is in accordance with
Right. Without this he would be in contradiction with
his own nature. Obedience without the Spirit of
Liberty, is the cause and occasion of all Secret Societies.
For there is a natural tendency implanted in mankind
to communicate to one another what is in them,
especially in what bears upon man generally. Such
Societies would therefore fall away if such liberty were
more favoured. And how can governments obtain the
knowledge which is necessary for furthering their own
essential object otherwise than by giving scope in its
origin and in its effects, to this estimable spirit of
human Liberty?
“In every Commonwealth there must
be obedience to coercive laws relating
to the whole people and regulated by
the mechanism of the political
constitution. But at the same time
there must be a Spirit of Liberty among
the people; for every one needs to be
convinced by reason in things relating
to universal human duty, that such
coercion is in accordance with Right.”
There is a certain practical spirit that professes to
disregard all principles of pure Reason; and it expresses
itself nowhere with more presumption regarding
theoretical truth than in reference to the question as to
the requisites of a good political constitution. The
cause of this is that where there has been a legal
constitution long in existence the people have been
gradually accustomed to take that state in which
everything has hitherto advanced in a quiet course, as
the rule by which to judge of their happiness as well as
their rights. On this account they have not been
accustomed to judge of their condition in these
respects according to the conceptions which are
furnished by reason regarding them. And thus they
come rather to prefer continuance of their passive state
to the dangerous position of seeking for a better; for
here too the maxim which Hippocrates lays down for
12
the physician finds application ‘judgment is uncertain,
experiment is dangerous.’[9] Thus it is that all
constitutions that have subsisted for some length of
time—whatever may be their defects—agree, amid all
their differences in one result, namely, in producing a
certain contentment with every one’s own. Hence,
when regard is given merely to the prosperity of the
people, theory has properly no place but everything
rests upon the practice that follows experience. But the
question arises whether there is anything in Reason
that can find expression in the term ‘Political Right,’
and whether this conception is of binding force in the
case of men who stand in antagonism to each other in
virtue of their individual liberty? This involves the
question as to the objective and practical reality of
such a principle of Right, and whether it can be
applied without regard to the mere well-being or illbeing which may arise from it, the knowledge of which
can only rest upon experience. If there be such a basis
of political Right, as has now been maintained, it must
be founded upon the principles of pure Reason; for
experience cannot teach what is right and just in itself.
And, if it be so, there is a Theory of Political Right, and
no Practice is valid which is not in conformity with it.
Against this position objection could only be taken
in the following way. It might be alleged that, although
men have in their minds the idea of rights as belonging
to them, they are still, on account of their obtuseness
and refractoriness, incapable and unworthy of being
treated in accordance with it. And hence it might be
maintained that a supreme Power proceeding merely in
accordance with rules of expediency, should and must
keep them in order. This is a leap of despair, a salto
mortale; and it is of such a kind that since Might only,
and not Right, comes into consideration, the people
may then also be justified in trying their best by force;
and all legal constitution is thus made uncertain. If
there be no human Right which compels respect
directly by its rationality, then all influences put forth to
control the arbitrary will and liberty of men, will be
found unavailing. But if along with the sentiment of
Benevolence, the principle of Right speaks aloud,
Human Nature will show itself not to be so degenerate
that its voice will not be heard with reverence. We may
say of it in the words of Virgil:
Tum pietate gravem meritisque si forte virum
quem
Conspexere, silent arrectisque auribus adstant.
Notes
[1]Pactum unionis civilis.
[2]Pactum Sociale.
[3]Occupatio bellica.
[4][The term Selbständigkeit, here rendered by Selfdependency,’ is represented by Kant in his text by the
Latin equivalent Sibisufficientia. The word ‘selfsufficiency,’ however, would be apt to mislead English
readers. The term is commonly translated by
‘Independence,’ but ‘Self-dependency’ has been
preferred as more closely indicative of the form and
connotation of the German word.—Tr.]
[5]If, for example, a proportioned war-tax were
imposed on all the subjects, they are not entitled,
because it is burdensome, to say that it is unjust
because somehow, according to their opinion, the war
was unnecessary. For they are not entitled to judge of
this; whereas because it is at least always possible that the
war was inevitable and the tax indispensable, it must be
regarded as rightful in the judgment of the subject. If,
however, in such a war certain owners of property were
to be burdened by imposts, from which others of the
same class were spared, it is easily seen that a whole
people could not concur in such a law, and it is entitled
at the least to make protestation against it, because it
could not regard this unequal distribution of the public
burdens as just.
[6]Here belong certain prohibitions of imports in
order that the means of acquisition may be promoted
in the best interests of the subjects, and not for the
advantage of strangers and the encouragement of the
industry of others; because the State without the
prosperity of the people, would not possess sufficient
power to resist external enemies or to maintain itself as
a Commonwealth.
[7]However the actual compact of the People with
the Ruler may be violated, the People cannot in fact
directly offer opposition as a Commonwealth, but only by
mutiny and rebellion. For the hitherto existing
Constitution is then broken through by the People;
whereas the organisation of a new Commonwealth has
still to find place. In these circumstances the state of
Anarchy arises with all the abominations, which are
thereby at least made possible; and the wrong which
thus ensues is what is inflicted by one party upon
another in the People. Thus from the example referred
to above, it is seen how the rebellious subjects of that
13
State strove at last to force on each other a Constitution
which would have been far more oppressive than the
one they abandoned; as it would have led to their being
consumed by Clergy and Aristocrats instead of their
waiting for more equality in the distribution of the
burdens of the State under an all-controlling Head.
[8]No Law or Right in the State can be, as it were
maliciously concealed by a secret reservation; least of
all the Rights which the people claim as belonging to
the Constitution, because all its laws must be conceived
as having sprung from a public will. If the Constitution
allowed insurrection, it would therefore publicly have
to define the right to it as well as the way in which it
was to be put in practice.
[9]‘Judicium anceps, experimentum periculosum.’
