76
>
Kti^STAr:ONLM

  VYITiiUxiA\,  , '
 ARMED FORCES MEDICAL LIBRARY
I
|       Washington, D. C.


                SOME-

OBSERVATIONS

                ON  THE

  SITUATION, DISPOSITION,

                  AND

       CHARACTER

               OF  THE

INDIAN   NATIVES

                OF  THIS

        CONTINENT.
C9
0        s7
1 -will declare the Decree:  The Lop. d bath /aid utii\me,
  Thou are my Sen, this Day have I begotten thee,  jfp&f
  me, and I pall  give  thee the Heathen for thine Inheri-
  tance,  and the utiermoft Parts of the Earth for thy Pof-
  fejfion.  Psalm  ii. 7.
Of en thy Mouth for the  Dumb, in the Ccvfe of all fuch as
  are appointed to Dcflrudion.  Pro v. xxxi. 8.
       PHILADELPHIA:

Fainted and sold by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, 11
              MAR KET-STR E ET.
               M  DCC LXXXIV.
/
PREFACE.
      TH E writer of the following fheets
       has thrown together a few  fads,
 to  obviate  fome  miftakes which  have
 been embraced, refpeding the Natives of
 this land; he neither vvifhes to natter thofe
 of  his own colour by acknowledging that
 they  are fuperior to  the tawney Indian ;
 otherwife than as they excel him in ads
 of  beneficence and of an imitation of the
 the great Author of the Chriftian Religi-
 on  ; whofe name they haveaflumed;  nor
 to  exalt the charader of the poor  untu-
 tored Indian,  at the expenfe of truth, by
 over-rating  their  chaftity, their love of
 j'uftice, and hofpitality ;  particularly in
 their afFedionate  reception of cur An-
 ceftors on their firfl fettlement of Penn-
 fylvania;  nor  to fay more in their favour
 than is fupported by the concurrent tefti-
 monies of hiftorians  of  various religious
 profeflions and different nations.
  Neither  is it intended to juftify thefe
 people in any of their  ads of cruelty :



30££ffl&.-.;,.: "OR Le^IIANGE
             N.L.L1.
[   iv   ]
The motives which have induced the wri-*-
ter to engage in this publication are lupe-
rior  to party views;  an apprehenfion of
duty, and univerfal good-will to mankind.
And if the Indian is reprefented to have
been opprcffed and injured, it is not to
provoke a fpirit of retaliation,  nor to ex-
cite a difcontent,  but to ftate to  the view
of the public, wherein they have been
aggrieved ; and  wherein they have been
culpable,  that the people of thefe ftates
may fee they have not been  free from
blame, in hopes that a more  candid and
indulgent confideration  of  their fitua-
tion may excite in us humanity and ten-
dernefs.
  Be not offended therefore if the Indian
is reprefented as a rational being as well
as ourfelves, if having an immortal foul,
capable of receiving the  refining influ-
ence of our holy  religion, it  is that  he
may be allowed to dwell in fafety, and re-
joice in the  opportunity, which a return
of peace,  may  afford to inftrud him in
the knowledge of the true God.
  If doubts  fhould remain, whether the
Indians are, indeed  fufceptible  of thofc
religious imprefiions  as here mentioned;
the reader is referred to the feveral ac-
counts of the fuccefsful labours of the pi-
                                   ous
C   v    ]
ous Thomas  Mayew, John Elliott, and
others  in  New-England,  published by
themfelves; and'alfo a publication  of a
more  late date, by  David Brainard, of
New-Jerfey who refided among them fe-
deral  years,  entitled, Mirabila Dei in-
ter Indicos : Or the Rife and Progrefs of
a remarkable  Work  of Grace amongft a
Number of Indians, in the Provinces of
New-Jerfey and Pennfylvania*
SOME
A 2
•*■"
            S  O M E

OBSERVATIONS

           ON  THE

  INDIAN  NATIVES

            OF THIS

       CONTINENT.
    SITUATE as we are on this Con-
     tinent with very extenfive frontiers,
bordering upon  a vaft wildernefs,  inha-
bited by the  native Indians, it becomes a
fubjed worthy the moft ferious attention
©f every friend of mankind, every lover
©f  his country,  to be truly  informed
what is the fituation and difpofition of that
people,  fo far as it may have an influence
upon our duty  as  Chriftians, and otir
peace and fafety as members of Civil So-
ciety ; And  that we may not make a rafh
                              c Hi mate
(   7    )
eftimate of our  own importance, or of
the incapacity of thofe  people for religi-
ous improvement, the following obferva-
tions  and  quotations are recommended
to the ferious perufal of every reader, as
they give a view of the opinions of fome
of the early  fettlers, of different deno-
minations, in this continent.
   The firft fettlers of Pennfylvania,  who
had full opportunities of being acquaint-
ed with the nature and  difpofition of the
Natives,  and who made  it a principal
point to obferve ftrid juftice in all  their
tranfadions with them,  have left us very
favourable memorials  of the long conti-
nued  kindnefs  they experienced  from
thefe people  : the great difadvantages to
which their ignorance and roving temper
fubjeded  them, our forefathers  thought
it their duty to endeavour  to draw them
from, by  exemplary ads of benevolence
and  inflrudion ;  which pious  pradice
has fince  been fuccefsfully purfued, by
feveral well difpofed perfons in New-Eng-
land, New-Jerfey,  and elfewhere:  feve-
ral of whom have tranfmitted fatisfadory
accounts of their labours*
   From thefe publications as well as from
 the remembrance of fome  yet  living,  it
 is evident that the natural difpofition of
                                   the
(   8    J
 the Indians has generally been to mew
 kindnefs to the Europeans,  in their early
 fettlements; and that their mental pow-
 ers are  equally with our own capable of
 improvement;  that  the apparent differ-
 ence in them, as well as in the Black Peo-
 ple and  us, arifes principally from  the
 advantages of our education, and  man-
e  r of life.
   Some writers have reprefented  Indians
 as naturally ferocious,  treacherous, and
 ungrateful, and endeavoured to eftablifh
 this charader of them,  from fome  parti-
 cular tranfadion which hath happened on
 fpecial occafions : but  no conclufion of
 their original charader fhould be drawn
 from inftances in which they have  been
 provoked,  to a degree of fury and ven-
 geance, by unjuft and cruel treatment
 From European Aggrefforsj of which
 moll hiftories of the firft fettlements on
 this  continent  furnifh  inftances,  and
 which writers have endeavoured to  co-
 lour and vindicate,  by reprobating  the
 charader of thofe poor people.
   It is a matter of fad, proved by moft
 Hiftorical Accounts of the trade carried
 on with the Indians at our firft acquaint-
 ance with them, as well  as in the  firft
 fettlements made on this continent, that
                                 they *
(    9   )
they  generally manifefled   themfelves
to be  kind, hofpitable and generous to
the Europeans,  fo long  as  they  were
treated with juftice and humanity; but
when the  adventurers from  a  thirft of
gain, over reached the Natives,  and they
faw fome  of their friends and  relations
treacheroufly entrapped and carried away
to be fold  for flaves, * themfelves injuri-
oufly treated and  driven from  their  na-
tive poffemons, what  could be  expeded
but that fuch a fordid  condud in the Eu-
ropeans, would produce a change of  dif-
pofition in the Indians.   The early  fet-
tlers of New-Jerfey have always  confirm-
ed the teftimony  of the  Pennfylvanians,
with refped to the good ufage  they met
                                   with
  * Amongft the  many inftances of this kind
which might be given, that are recorded by  dif-
ferent authors, the following is moft ftriking, viz.
One  Hunt an early  trader with the Indians of
New-England, after a profperous trade with the
Natives,  enticed between 20 or 30 on board his
veflel, and contrary to the public faith, clapped
them under hatches, and frld them to the Spa-
niards at Malaga  ; but  the Indians refented it,
and revenged themfelves on the next Englifh that
came on -the coaft.   Neat's Hiftory of New-Eng-
land, page 21,
(    >o    )
with from the Indians.  The writer of
the Hiftory of- that Province informs us,
page 440,  " That, for almoft a centu-
"  ry, the Natives had all along maintain-
"  ed an intercourfe  of great cordiality
••  and friendfhip with the inhabitants.'*
   It is well known that the Indians' de-
portment to  each other is peaceable and
inoffenfive ; efteeming fudden anger un-
becoming and ignominious; they feldom
differ with their neighbour, or do  them
any harm or injury, except when intoxi-
cated by ftrong liquor, of which they are
fond, to an enormous degree : this  is the
general  charader given of Indians, by all
impartial writers.
   The noted French author Charlevoix,
who appears to have been deep in his in-
quiries  into their manners and difpofiti-
on, in his long travels from (Quebec, thro'
the lakes and down the  Mifhflipi to Flo-
rida,  informs,  " That with a mein and
"  appearance altogether  favage;   and
"  with  manners and  cuftoms which fa-
"  vour  the greateft  barbarity, the  Indi-
"  ans enjoy all the advantages of focicty.
"  At firft view, fays he, one would ima-
"  gine  them without form of govern-
"  ment, law or fubordination, and fub-
"  jed  to the wildeft  caprice ; neverthe-
                               " left,
(    l«   )
*6  lefs,  they rarely  deviate  from certain
"  maxims  and ufages founded on good
"  fenfe alone, which holds the place  of
"  law,  and  fupplies in fome fort,  the
"  want of legal  authority. *   Reafon
"  alone is capable of retaining them in a
"  kind of  fubordination;  not the  lefs
"  effedual, towards  the end propofed,
"  for being  entirely  voluntary.   They
"  manifeft  much ftability in the engage-
"  ments they have  folemnly entered  up-
"  on ;  patient in afflidion, as well as in
"  their fubmiflion to what  they  appre-
"  hend to be the appointment of  Provi-
"  dence ;  in  all which they  manifeft  a
"  noblenefs of foul,  and  conftancy of
"  mind,  at which we rarely arrive with
"  all our Philofophy and Religion.  As
*'  they are neither flavesto ambition,  nor
                             " intereft^
  * Human Nature, even in  its  rudeft ftate, is
poflefTed of a ftrong fenfe of right and wrong ; a
pure principle which is not confined to any name
or form, but diffufes itfelf as  univerfally as  the
fun; it is '* That light which enlightens every man
»«  coming into the world," John i. 9.   All thofe
who yield 10 its impreffions are brethren  in the
full extent of the cxprellion, however differing in
other refpefts.
(   "    )
 "  intereft; the two paflions which have
 "  fo much weakened in us thofe  fenti-
 "  ments of humanity,  which the kind
 "  Author of Nature has engraven in the
 "  human heart, and kindled thofe of co-
 "  vetoufnefs,  which are as yet generally  *
 "  unknown amongft them."
   Is it not notorious that they are gene-
 rally kinder to us than we  are to them ?
 There is fcarce an inftance occurs, but
 that they'treat every  white man, who
 comes  amongft them,  with  refped;
 which is not the cafe from  us to them.
   Their modeft condud to women who
 have been captured by them, is certainly
 worthy of commendation, much exceed-
 ing what would be expeded,  in  like
 cafes, from the lower clafs amongft our-
 felves.
  It is alfo acknowledged by all impar-
 tial perfons, who have been converfant
 with Indians, that  they have generally
 raanifefted  a faithfulnefs to the engage-
 ments they have entered into for the fafe-
ty of any perfon they have undertaken to
proted,  far  exceeding that  to be found
amongft the generality of white people ;
as alfo in the performance of thofe cove-
 nants which they have confirmed by giv-
ing belts of wampum.
                          Charlevoix
(   «3    )
   Charlevoix farther  obferves, " That
" whoever  infinuates himfelf in their
" efteem, will find them fufficiently  do-
" cile to do any  thing he defires ;  but
*' that this is not  eafily  gained, as they
" generally  give  it to  merit  only,  of
" which they are as good judges asmoft
<s amongft us.  He adds, that thefe good
" difpofitions are very much eclipfed  by
" the cruelty they  fometimes exercife
" upon  fuch  of  their enemies,  whom
" they have devoted to death ; as well as
" the right they almoft univerfally claim
u to private revenge.  They confider it
" as a point of honour to avenge inju-
" ries done  to their friends, particular-
<c ly the  death of a relation j blood for
" blood,  death for  death, can only  fa-
" tisfy the furviving friends of the inju-
" red party."  Something of the fame
law of retaliation was ufual amongft the
ancient Jews  and Romans.
   From  this  principle,  as well as from
the  high  notions  they have  of military
glory, the young Indians fometimes fud-
denly purfue  violent meafures, contrary
to the mind of their elders.
   "  It is, fays the fame  Author,  a feel-
"  ing experience  of  the Chriftian Re-
"  ligion,  which alone is  able to perfed
                B            " their
(    14    )
" their good qualities, and corred that
" which is wrong in them; this is com-
" mon to them with other  men; but
" what is peculiar to them is, that they
*' bring fewer obftacles to this improve-
" ment, after, thro* the operation of
" grace, they have once began to believe
" in the great truths of the gofpel."
   The good difpofition of the more fouth-
em Indians is fenfibly fet forth by De las
Cafas, Bifhop of Chapia, who fpent much
time and labour in endeavouring to pre-
ferve the Indians of New-Spain, from the
grievous oppreflion they laboured under,
in his reprefentation to  the  King  and
Council of Spaini which, with little va-
riation, may well be applied to the na-
tives  of  moft  parts  of  the  continent.
He fays,  "  I was  one of the firft who
«« went to America, neither curiofity nor
" intereft prompted me to undertake fo
" long and dangerous  a voyage; the
'* faving the fouls of the Heathens was
" my fole objed.  Why was I not per-
« mitted, even at  the expenfe  of my
" blood, to ranfom  fo many thoufands
" of fouls who fell  unhappy  vidims to
" avarice or luft.-------It  is faid, that
" barbarous executions  were neceffary
" to punifh or check the  rebellion of the
                            " AmerU
'(    is   )
Americans;  but to whom  was this
owing ? did  not  thofe people receive
the Spaniards  who firft came amongft
them, with  gentlenefs and humanity ?
did they not  mew more joy, in pro-
portion,  in   lavifhing  treafure  upon
them, than  the Spaniards did greedi-
nefs in receiving it ?-------but our ava-
rice was not  yet  fatisfied-------tho'
they gave up to us their land and their
riches, we would take from them their
wives, their children, and their liber-
ty.------To  blacken  thefe  unhappy
people,  their enemies affert,  that they
are fcarce human creatures-------but
it is we ought  to blufh for having been
lefs men, and more barbarous than
they.-------They are reprefented as  a
ftupid people,  addidedto vice;———.
but have they  not contraded moft of
their vices from the examples of Chri-
ftians ?  And as to thofe vices peculiar
to themfelves, have not the Chriftians
quickly exceeded them therein ?  Ne-
verthelefs it  mult be granted, that the
Indians ftill remain untainted  with ma-
ny vices, ufual amongil the Europe-
ans;  fuch  as ambition,  blafphemy,
treachery, and  many  like monfters,
which have  not yet took place with
                           '<  rfiem;
           (   >6    )
them; they have fcarce an  idea of
them,  fo that, in efted, all the advan-
tage we  can claim,  is to have more
elevated  notions of  things, and  our
faculties  more  unfolded,  and more
cultivated than theirs.------Don't let
us flatter our corruptions, nor volunta-
rily  blind ourfelves j  all nations  are
equally free: one nation has no right
to infringe upon the  freedom of ano-
ther : let us do towards thofe people,
as we would have them  to have done
to us,  if they had landed  upon  our
fhore,  with the fame fuperiority of
ftrength.  And, indeed, why fhould
not  things be  equal on  both fides.
How long has the right of the  ftrong.-
eft  been  allowed to be the  balance of
juftice.   What part  of the  Gofpel
c;ives a fandion to fuch a dodrine.
In what part of the whole earth did the
Apoftles  and firfb   promulgators of
the Gofpel, ever claim a right over the
lives, the freedom, or the fubftance of
the Gentiks.  What  a ftrange   me-
thod  this of propagating the Gofpel,
that holy  law of grace, which from
being  flaves to fatan,  initiates us  into
the freedom of  the children of God.'*
                                Ta
(   '7    )
  To this pious Bifhop*s teftimony, may
be added that of Page Dupart, in his
Hiftory of Louifiana, who during a refi-
dence  of fixteen years, appears to have
been careful  in his enquiries, relating
to the nature and difpofition of thofe fe-
veral nations  feated in a fpace of 1500
miles  on both fides the  Miffiffipi, with
fome of whom  he  was intimately con-
verfant,  whom he reprefents as generally
endowed with good fenfe, kindnefs  and
moderation.   He tells us,  " That upon
" an acquaintance with the Indians, he
" was convinced that it is wrong to de-
" nominate them Savages, as they are ca-
" pable of  making a good ufe of their
" reafon, and their fentiments  are juft;
" that they  have a degree  of prudence,
" faithfulnefs and generofity, exceeding
u that of nations who would be offended
" at being  compared with them.
   " No people,  he fays, are  more ho-
" fpitable  and  free than  the  Indians;
" hence they  might be efteemed an hap-
" py people,  if that happinefs was not
" impeded  by their paflionate fondnefs
" for fpirituous liquors, and the  foolifh
" notion they hold  in common, with
" many profeffing Chriftians, of gaining
" reputation and efteem, by their pr>
                   B 2
(    '8    )
"  efs in war:" both which potent evils,
have  from views of policy or intereft,.
been  much  encouraged  by their Eu-
ropean neighbours."
   From him, as alfo from fome other au-
thors, we learn that fome of thefe nations
appear but little inclined to war, and there
a< eothers who abfolutely refufe to take any
part therein, but patiently  bear the hard-
fhips which the violence of other  Indians
fubjeds them to \ of  which good dif-
pofition we have  had inftances amongft
ourfelves in the cafe of the Moravian In-
dians.
   Duprat  obfcrves  upon  the  whole,
"  That there  needs but  prudence and
"  good fenfe,  to perfuade  the Indians to
"  what is reafonable,  and  to  preferve
"  their friendfhip without interruption*
"  He adds, We  may  fafely  affirm that
"  the differences we have had with them,
c:  have  been more  owing to us  than to
"  them.   When  they  are treated info-
"  lently oroppreflively, they have no lefs
"  fenfibility of injuries than others.   If
«c  thofe who have occafion to live among
■'  them, will  have fentiments  of hu-
"  manity, they  will meet in them with
«  men.**
                                Many
(    »9    >
   Many more authors might be quoted,
declarative of the commendable qualities
which  have appeared  in  the  Indians,
whilft uncorrupted by an intercourfe with
the Europeans, and which is ftill the cafe
in the difpofition of thofe nations fituated
at a diftance from us. *    This particu-
                                      larly
  * Note, In a late Hiftory of the Britifti Domi-
nions in North-America, printed in 1773, p 219,
the Author fpeaking of the Natives, fays, *l The
*•  nearer the Indians of Canada are viewed, the
"  more good qualities are difcovered  in tbem;.
••  for moft of the principles which ferve to regu-
'«  late their conduct;  the general  maxims  by
"  which they govern themfelves ; and  the eflen-
**  tial parts  of their character,  difcover nothing
"  of  the barbarian."
   Of  the Five Nation Indians, M.  Delapoterie. a
French Author,  (wherein he very much agrees
with Cadwalader Colden,,  late prefident of New-
York)  in  his account of  thofe Indians,  fays,
*«  They are thought by a common miftake, to be
*•  mere barbarians, always thirfting for human
««  blood ;  but their true character  is  very diflfer-
«  ent; they are indeed the fierceft and moft for-
««  midable people in North- America ; and at the
««  fame time, as politic and judiciouc.as well can be
' •  conceived, which appears from the management
»«  of all the affairs they tranfact, not only with the
'«  French and Englifh, but likewife with almoffc
*  all  the Indian Nations of this vaft continent.
                                I' Speaking
(    «o    )
larly appears  from accounts  left us  by
Jonathan   Carver,  who  from  the  year
1766, to the year 1768, inclufive, vifited
feveral Nations weft of the river MiffiiTipi,
and the upper  lakes.  Speaking of the
general  temper  of the  Indians fituate  in
thofe parts, he tells us,  "  They are ex-
"  tremely liberal to each other, and fup-
"  ply the  deficiencies  of their  friends,
"  with  any  fuperfluity of  their   own
                           «  ------That
  " Speaking of the Cherokees, and other Seuth-
«« ern Indians, page  157, he  fays, Thefe Indi-
•« ans look upon the end  of life, to be living
" happily;  and for this purpofe, their whole
•« cuftoms  are   calculated to  prevent  avarice,
«' which they think imbitters life; and nothing is
" a more fevere  reflection amongft them, than to
" fay, That a man lover  hit own.  To prevent  the
«' rife and propagation  of fuch a  vice, upon the
«« death of any  Indian, they  burn all that  be-
«' longs to the  deceafed, that  there may be no
«« temptation for the parent to hoard up a  fu-
• « perfluity of arms, and domeftic conveniences
•' for his children.   They  ftrengthen this  cu-
«« (lorn,  by a fuperftition, that it is agreeable to
« the foul of the deceafed, to burn all they leave,
«« and that affliction follow thofe who ufe any of
«4 their  goods.    They  cultivate no  more land
«« than is neceflary for their plentiful  fubfillance,
«« aad hofpitality to ftrangers."
             (    »    )
te        -That governed by the plain and
"  equitable laws of Nature,  every one is
"  remarked folely according to his de-
"  ferts j and their equality, condition,
"  manners and privileges, with that con-
"  ftant fociable familiarity which prevails
*'  thro*  every  Indian Nation, animates
u  them with a pure and  truly  patriotic
«'  fpirit, that tends to the general good
"  of the Society to which  they  belong.
"  The Indians, he fays, are not without
"  fome fenfe of Religion, fuch as proves
"  that  they  worfhip the  great Creator,
"  with  a degree of purity  unknown to
"  nations who  have greater opportuni-
"  ties of improvement.
   "  That the pleas of Indians for mak-
*'  ing war, are in general more  rational
u  and juft, than fuch as are brought by
"  Europeans, in vindication of their pro-
"  ceedings.   To  fecure  the rights  of
"  hunting-------to maintain the liberty
"  of pafling thro* their accuftomed trads,
««  and to guard thofe lands which they
"  confider, from a long tenure,  as their
"  own, againft any infringment, are the
"  general  caufes  of thofe diffenfions
<«  which lb often break  out between the
"  Indian  Nations.   He  agrees  with
«  Charlevoix, that the  Indians  feel in-
                              " juries.
(   ™    )
u  juries with exquifitefenfibility; whence
"  they purfue vegeance with unremitting
"  ardour."
   Whilft in  the Indian Country, he was
inftrumental in preventing the Chipeways
and Nadoweflis Indians from profecuting
the war, which had during a  courfe of
40 years, fubfifted between them.   This,
the old Indians told him, they had long
wiflied to put an end to; but that their
endeavours were fruftrated by the young
warriors, of  either nation,  who  could
not reflrain their ardour  when they met.
They faid they fhould be happy, if fome
chief of the fame  pacific difpofition as
himfelf, and who poffefled an  equal de-
gree of refolution and  coolnefs, would
fettle in the country between the two na-
tions ; for by the interference of fuch a
perfon,  an accommodation, which,  on
their part, they fincerely defired might be
brought about.   From this circumflance,
as  well as what Duprat and others obferve
of the peaceable difpofition of  fome of
the Indians,  we may well conclude, that
fufceptible as thofe untutored people are,
to  the didates of reafon, if the profeffors
of Chriftianity had, by a proper ufe of
that  fuperior knowledge  they  were fa-
voured with,  honeftly laboured,  thro*
                               Divine
(   *3    )
Divine help, to acquaint them with the na-
ture and precepts of the Gofpel; to make
them fen fible of that univerfal brotherhood
that loving, meek, forgiving fpirit,  which
the precepts and example of our Saviour
call for, it  would have been a matter of
the greateft joy both to them  and  us;
but the revcrfe has happened, except in
a few particular inftances ;  the different
denominations of  Chriftians have  rather
added, frefh fuel to this falfe fire,  by in-
citing the poor Natives,  when it has fuit-
ed  their political  purpofe, to  violence
amongft themfelves, and to become par-
ties in  the wars they have waged one
againft another.
   A difpofition to mifreprefent and black-
en  the Indians, in order to juftify, or
palliate the pradiae of unjuft and cruel
meafures towards  them,  has particularly
appeared in the  zffeding cafe  of thofe
Indians, denominated Moravian Indians,
fettled on  the Mufkingum, a branch of
the Ohio ; who have,  of late, deeply fuf-
fered  on account  of  what  they thought
the peaceable fpirit of the Gofpel requir-
ed of them.   A true reprefentation of
the ftate and difpofition of thofe Indians,
as well as an account  of this  deplorable
tranfadion, drawn from the account giv-
                                    en
              (    *4   )
en by the furvivors, appears neceffary, as
well to  refcue  thofe innocent fufferers
from the odium which has been fo un-
juftly caft upon them,  as to prevent ftran-
gers, who may come  amongft us,  from
forming fuch erronious ideas  of  the Na-
tives, as may have an  influence upon the
welfare of both them, and  the White
People.
  The firft gathering of thofe Indians  in-
to a good degree of  civil and religious
order, was about 30 years ago, by means
of  one of  them,  named  Papunhank.
The place of their refidence at that time,
was at Whihaloofing,  on  the Sufquehan-
na, about 200 miles from Philadelphia,
In the  converfation they had  with  fome
ferious people, in  a  vifit to that  city,
about the year 1756, at a  time when the
province was diftreffed  by the Indian war,
they appeared to have  a feeling fenfe of
that  inward change of heart  which the
Gofpel requires,  and declared their par-
ticular difapprobation  of war, and fixed
refolution to take no part therein ; appre-
hending it to be difpleafing  to the Great
Being, who, as one  of them exprefted
it,  " Did not make men to dcflroy men ;
" but to love and afjifl each cth.r."   'They
held  a conference  with the Governor,
                                   in
(   *5   )
in which they informed him,  " That
"■ they remembered the old friendfhip
" which fubfifted between  their Forefa-
" thers and  ours ; that they were great
" lovers of peace, and Tiad not  taken
" any part in the war."
   They  delivered  three white prifoners
which they had recovered from the other
Indians.   They  defired that no ftrong
drink  fhould be given them, nor be fent
to their town.  The  fpeaker,  Papun-
hank, appeared ferious, as  under a fenfe
of the Divine Prefence, and concluded
with  a folemn prayer, with which the
whole audience feemed much affeded.
   About  13  years  paft, thefe  Indians
meeting  with difficulty,   from an en-
creafe of White  Settlers   near them,
by which fpirituous liquors were brought
to their towns; they  removed to  the
Mufkingum,  a branch of the Ohio.   In
their perigrination thither, they were ac-
companied by fome of the Moravians,
who  have long refided with them, and
by their careful attention,  both to their
civil  and religious concerns, never leav-
ing them, even in the times of their great-
eft danger and  difficulty,  a near  and
fleady connedion  between them took
place.
                C            During
(   *«    )
   During the late troubles, thefe Indians
 adhering to the principles they had long
 profefled, abfolutely refufed to take any
 part  in  the  war,  notwithftanding the
 threats and repeated abufes they received
 on that account from other tribes, par-
 ticularly thofe parties which paffed thro'
 their towns,  in  their way  to  our fron-
 tiers ;  whom  they  fometimes  difluaded
 from their hoftile  intentions,  and pre-
 vailed upon to go back again ;  or warn-
 ed the  inhabitants  of  their  danger.
 This humane condud being confidcred as
 obftrudive to the hoftile proceedings of
 the Tribes at war, was at  length made
 the pretence of carrying them off.  Ac-
 cordingly, on the 4th of Auguft,  1781,
 a  firing  of Wampum was Tent by the
 Chief of the Wyondats, who refidcd at
 Sandulky, with a meffage, letting them
 know, He was coming with a number of
 warriors; but biding them be not afraid,
 for he was their friend.  In a few days
 after, 220 warriors arrived, when  call-
 ingacouncil of the head men of the three
 Moravian  towns, they acquainted them
they were come to take them away ;  ren-
derings for a reafon,  " That they, and
"  their Indians, were a great obftrudion
f*  to them in their war-path."  They re-
                              turned
(   *7    )
turned them this anfwer:  " That it was
" impoflible for them to remove at that
" time, and leave their corn behind them,
" left they and their children fhould pc-
" rifh with hunger in the  wildernefs."
To this, the Chief of the Wyondats, at
firft, feemed  to attend >  but being infti-
gated by fome white men in their com-
pany, they perfifted in their refolution ;
and after killing many of the cattle  and
hogs,  ripping up their  bedding,  and
committing many other outrages, on the
28th  of Auguft,  and  Septmber, forced
them from  their three towns,  in all be-
tween 3 and 400 perfons; who,  after a
tedious journey in the wildernefs, arrived
at a  branch  of Sandufky creek, where
the body  of them  were ordered to re-
main. Some of their principal men were
fent  to Major Arent Schuyler De Pey-
fter,  the Englifh Commander at fort De-
troit, who commended them, as a peace-
able  people, and exhorted them to re-
main fuch;  but added, That many com-
plaints had been  made  of them;  that
they had  given intelligence to his  ene-
mies,  &c. he had fent  for them;  but
that his inftrudions had been exceeded,
in the ill-treatment they had received ;
that however he would provide for them.
                                Thus
(   28   )
Thus the matter refted  till the fpring,
1782, when thefe Moravian Indians find-
ing corn fcarce and  dear  at Sandufky,
defired liberty to return  to their fettle-
ments, to fetch  fome of their  corn, of
which  they had left  above 200  acres
Handing; which when  granted, many
of them went,  among whom were  feve-
ral widows with their children, fome of
whom  had been fubjeded  10  fuch ex-
treme want, as to eat the carcafes of the
dead cattle  and horfes.
  When the people at and about the Mr>
nongahela,  underftood a number of Indi-
ans wrreat the Moravian towns, they gave
out,  that the  intention of thofe people
was, to fall upon the back inhabitants,
which  ought to be prevented.  Where-
upon  about 160 men got together, and
fwimming their horfes  over the Ohio,
came fuddenly  upon the  chief Moravian
town.  The firft perfon  who appeared,
they fhot at and wounded, when coming
up to him,  they found he  was  an half
Indian,  fon to John Bull,  one of the
Moravians, by  an   Indian  woman, to
whom  he is  regularly  married;  they
killed and  fcalped  him,  and proceeded
to the  town.   The Moravian  Indians,
who were  inoftiy  in  the fields pulling
                               corn,
             (   *<*   J
corn, did not run off,  as many of them
might, if they had been confcious of any
offence j but came of their own accord,
into the town, at the call of the white
people,  who at firft, expreffed  friendfhip
to them ; but foon after, violently feized
and bound  them, when the Helpers, *
of whom there were five of the moft re-
fpedable, in the company, and others
exhorted the younger,  to fubmifuon and
patience;  telling them,  they thought
their troubles in this world, would foon
be at  an end, and they would be with
their Saviour.   They then fung and pray-
ed together, till they were led out, one
after the other, and inhumanly ftaughter-
ed ; firft the men, and then the women.
Two boys, who made their efcape, relat-
ed thefe particulars.  One of them  lay
in the heap  of the dead, in a houfe, and
was fcalped; but recovering his fenfes,
efcaped: the other, who had hid himfelf
under the floor, was  an  eye-witnefs of
this tragic  fcene, and faw die  blood of
                  C 2             the
  * Thefe are Indian* who affift  the roifliona-
ties in keeping good order amongft their people,
a0d upon occafioB, give public exhortations,
(   30   )
the {lain running in a ftream.  Thefe Indi-
ans before being bound, were fo little ap-
prehenfive  of being charged with guilt,
that they informed the White People, that
more of their brethren were at another
town to which they accompanied them;
who in like manner fell a facrifice  with
them,  to  the  barbarity of  the whites.
The dead bodies were afterwards burned
with the houfes.    Before  their death,
they were alfo obliged to fhew  in  what
part of the woods they had concealed
their effcds, when  the other Indians (as
before mentioned) took them away.
   Thofe at the third town having  fome
tntelligence of  what paffed, made  their
efcape.  One of the Helpers, who efcap-
ed relates,  That in a conference they had
with the other Helpers,  when they  con-
fidered what they fhould do in cafe of  an
attack,  cither from the Americans,  or
the Indians, who had taken part with the
Englifh, fome of whom charged them of
having, thro* the  intelligence they gave
to  the  Virginians,  been  the   occalion
of  the  Daughter   of their  brethren, at
Gofchaching •,  the  refuh of their confer-
ence was," Not to go away, neverthclefs
•' toleave each onete adaccordingtothe
" feeling of fcis own heart.  He added,
                              "  That
(   3«    )
rt That  there was fo much love amongft
" them, that he had never felt the like
" before."  This  is a fummary  of this
dreadful tranfadion, as it is given by the
principle leader of thofe that remain.
  The Account, as it flands in the Penn-
fylvania  Gazette,  of April  17th, 1782,
after giving an account of the incurfions
of the  Indians,  adds,  "  That the peo-
" pie being greatly alarmed, and having
" received  intelligence that the  Indian
" towns, on the Mufkingum, had not
•c  moved as they had been told-------a
"  number of men properly provided, col-
" leded  and  rendevoufed on  the Ohio,
"  oppofite the Mingo  Bottom,  with a
•*  defign to furprife the above  towns
•'  -------160 men fwam the river, and
"  proceeded to the  towns on the Muf-
'*  kingum, where the Indians had col-
«•  leded  a large  quantity of  provifions
"  to fupply their war-parties.  They  ar-
"  rived at the town in the night, undif-
*'  covered, attacked the Indians in their
4<  cabbins,  and fo completely furprifed
"  them,  that they  killed and  fcalped
"  upwards of  90,  but a few  making
"  their efcape, about 40 of which were
"  warriors, the reft old women and chil-
«'  dren.  About 80 horfes fell into their
                             ^  hands*
             (    3*   )
c< hands,  which they loaded with  the
•* plunder, the greateft part furrs and
" fkins;  and returned   to* the  Ohio,
" without the lofs of one man."
  It is  alledged, in  vindication of this
deliberate maflacre, that 40 of thofe In-
dians were warriors, preparing to attack
Our frontiers; but this affertion contra-
dids it felf: for had it been the cafe, it
is  not likely they would have  brought
their wives,  with  the widows, and 34
children, who were flain with them, or
have fuffered them with themfelves, to be
thus murdered, without making the leaft
jefiftance, or hurt to their murderers.
  Soon after the death of thefe Indians,
about 500 men, probably encouraged by
this eafy conqueft affembled at the old Min-
gos on the weft fide of the Ohio, and being
equipped, on horfeback, fet on  for San-
dufky, where the remaining part of the
Moravian Indians  refided,  in order to
deftroy that fettlement, and other Indian
towns in thofe parts; but the Wyandots,
and other Indians, having fome know-
ledge of their approach,  met them  near
Sandufky, when an engagement enfued,
in which fome of the affailants were kill-
ed,  and feveral taken prifoners, amongft
whom was the Commander Col. Craw-
                                ford,
               (    33    )
ford, and his  fon-in-law.  The Col. the
Indians  put to n, cruel death, and killed
the other, with other prifoners.
   Doubtlefs the cruelty  exercifed on the
Col. and the death of the prifoners taken
at Sandufky,  was,  in a  great meafure,
owing to  the  murder of the  peaceable
Moravian Indians, at which they expreff-
ed much difpleafure.
   This grievous  tranfadion  appears in
a yet more afflidive point of view, when
it  is  confidered, that tho' many threats
had  been thrown out againft thofe Indi-
ans, both by  the Englifh  and Ameri-
cans, * yet they took no ftep for their fe-
                                 curity,
  * As the Wyondat  King in  his Speech told
them,  "  My coufins, you Chriftian  Indians, ia
" Gnadenhutten,  Shoenbrnn and  Salem, I am
" concerned on your account, as I fee you live
" in a dangerous  fituation.  Two mighty and
«' angry Gods ftand oppofite to each other, with
" their mouths wide open, and  you ftand be-
" tween them, and are in danger of being crufh-
" ed by the one or the other of them, or both,
«• and  crumbled with their teeth."   To which
the Chriftian Indians  anfwered, Uncle, &c. &c.
you  Shawanees our Nephews  ■    We have hi-
therto not feen our fituation fo dangerous as not
to Aay here.  We live in peace with all mankind,
t   34   )
ctfrity, trufting  in  the care of Heaven,
and the protedion  of the government,
under which they had lived many years
with due  fubmiffion.   But  fuch is  the
corrupting nature of war, that it gradu-
ally hardens  the heart,  to a  fearful  de-
gree of infenfibility.  Yet furely a time
of roufing muft come, when,  if not giv-
en up to obduracy,  equal to their dclufi-
on, the blood  of thefe innocent people
will be heavy upon all concerned in  the
fhedding of it.
  We cry out againft  Indian cruelty;  but
is  any thing which Indians have  done,
(all circumftances confidered) more in-
confiftent with  juftice,  reafon, and  hu-
manity, than the murder of thofe Mora-
vian Indians; a peaceable, innocent peo-
ple, whofe condud,  even when  under
the fcalping-knife,  evidenced a depend-
ance on Divine  Help for fupport, as much
becoming  Chriftians, as their fufferings
in fupport  of their religious  principles,
                                   and
and have nothing to do with the war.   We  de-
fire and requeft no more, than chat we may be
permitted to  live in  peace and quiet       We
will preferve your words and confider them-   ■
and fen J you,  Uncle, anaofwcr.
(   35   )
and their fidelity to the government had
before manifefted them to be our fpecial
friends.
  In vindication of this barbarous tranf-
adion,  endeavours have  been ufed,  to
make us believe,  that the whole race of
Indians are a people prone to every vice,
and deftitute of ©very virtue ; and with-
out a capacity for  improvement.  What
is this but blafphemoufly to arraign  the
wifdoei of  our Creator,  and infinuate,
that the exiftence He has  given them, is
incompatible with his moral government
of the world.  But this muft be admitted
to make way for the propofal of endea-
vouring the univerfal extirpation of In-
dians from t'ie face of the earth.  Such,
alas '• is the  manner  in which too many
of the  pretended followers, of the meek
and fuffering Saviour of the world, would
fulfil  the   prophecy  concerning  him,
" That he Jhall have the Heathen for his
w inheritance, and the uttermofl  Parts of
" the earth for his poffeffion."  And who
himfelf declared,  "  That he came not to
•' deftroy mens* lives, but  to fave them-,**
and when  fainting in his  laft agonv. un-
 der mockery and derifion, conceived at
 once a prayer, arid  an apology for  his
 murderer*: " Father > forgive them, thsy
                                •'  know
              (    36   )

 a know not what they do.**  Now fo far
 as we know the prevailance of this fpirit
 of love  and forgivenefs, over  the pride
 and wrath of our hearts, fo far are we
 the  difciples  and followers of Chrift;
 and fo far  only, can  we truly pray for,
 andwitnefs the coming of His  kingdom:
 and  on the other hand, fo  far as we are
 fubjed to a vindidive and unforgiving
 fpirit, fo  far  we are in a  ftate of alie-
 nation  from God, and  reprobate  con-
 cerning a true faith in  the Lord Jefus
 Chrift, which works only by love, to the
 purifying of the heart  from every difpo-
 fition of a contrary nature.   Was this
 diftindion always obferved in  our religi-
 ous   discriminations  of  mankind,  we
 fhould get thro' abundance of frivolous
 and  fuperficial prejudices  which divide
 the Chriftian World,  and be convinced,
 that  it  is not the colour of our  fkins,
 outward circumftances or profeflion, but
 the ftate and  temper  of the  mind and
 will, which makes us Jews  or  Gentiles;
 Chriftians or Heathens; Eled  or Repro-
bate,  in  the  fight of  God.   That this
change of heart is the  fure  effed of the
coming of ChrifVs kingdom,  was evi-
denced in many of thofe  Indians, whofe
cafe is here reprefented j who, by yield-
                                  ing
(   37   )
ing to the  operations of Divine Grace,
were brought to an entire reformation of
mind  and manners.   That favage feroci-
ty, with all thofe dazzling notions of ho-
nour, to  be gained from the deftrudion
of mankind,  fo natural to the fallen fons
of Adam, have  gradually melted away
in thefe Indians, into a frame of meek-
nefs,  humility and  love,  which  fup-
ported them in that lamb-like fubrniflion,
under that remarkable fucceflion of trials
and afilidions which was permitted to at-
tend them ; whereby  many of them are
at length put beyond the reach of enmi-
ty-
   We are told  by a late Author, who
appears zealous for the extirpation of all
Indians,  " That for a keg of whifkey,
61 you might induce any Indian to murder
" his  wife, children   and beft  friend.'*
That  this is not a juft charader  of Indi-
ans, all,  who  are acquainted with that
people, can teftify: yet there are, doubt-
lefs, ill-difpofed people amongft  them, as
well as amongft us, who under the dread-
ful power of ftrong drink,  (which has an
uncommon bad effed on them)  may be
led into the greateft enormities.   Never-
thelefs, as  has been  mentioned, impar-
tial men, who from good views, have
                  D           vifited
(   3»   )
 vifited  or refided with them, reprefent
 them in a very different light: as Char-
 levoix,  and  other French  and  Spanifli
 Authors : John Elliott,  Thomas Mayew;
 John Sergeant, in New-England ; David
 Brainard and others  in the Jerfeys ;  and
 more lately  the Moravians  in different
 parts.   Thefe have fpent much time  and
 labour for the civil and religious improve-
 ment of the Natives, in which they all
 expreffcd fatisfadion and comfort.
   And  it is worthy of peculiar  notice,
 that in  the wars the Indians have waged
 upon our frontiers, there has fcarce been
an inftance of any of thofe Indians, who
had  made  a ferious profeflion  of  the
Chriftian Religion, having been concern-
ed in the barbarous eruptions againft us. *
                                  Thefe
  ♦Neal, p. 30, 2d. vol. fays, ''There isone thing
'« which deferves to be taken notice of; that h,
«  the unfhaken fidelity of the  Indian Converts,
««  during the whole courfe of the war, whomnei-
«*  ther perfuafion nor thrjatnings of their coun-
" trymen, could  draw from their allegiance to
««  the Englifh.  The government had a watchful
««  eye upon them at firft, and the mob being in-
««  cenfed againft Indians,  could hardly  be re-
««  (trained from facrificing the Converts to their
«« fury."                             The
(    39    )
Thefe have generally put themfelves un-
der the protedion of their feveral govern-
ments ; as former inftances in New-Eng-
land, and the inftance of the  Moravian
Indians,  both in the  former,  and late
war, will undoubtedly evince.
   The people of Pennfylvania, and New-
Jerfeys,  as has been already noted, have
had full  opportunity to experience  the
good difpofition  and kindnefs of the In-
dians, fo long as they were treated with
juftice and humanity, as particularly ap-
pears from the many ftriking inftances of
probity, gratitude and beneficence,  on
record, at a time when the  difparity of
their numbers was  fo  great, that  they
might have eafily deftroyed  the fettlers,
                                     had
  The fame Author obferves, That  the govern-
ment was fo well fatisfied with the fidelity of the
Indians, that inftead of difarming them,  as was
defired, the Indians on Martha's Vineyard, who
were twenty to one  in number to the  White
People, continued fo  faithful  to their engage-
ments, that they were fupplied with all  forts of
ammunition, and tne defence of the Ifland com-
mitted to their care; and fo f.iithful were they to
their truft, that all people that landed upon the
Ifland, during the courfe of the war, were, with-
out diftincTion, brought before the Governor,
              (   40    )

 had they been fo minded.   But fo far
 were they from molefting them, that they
 were rather as nurfing fathers to them ;
 granting  them  ample room for  fettle-
 ments ;  freely aililting  them  with  the
 means of  living,  at eafy rates ;  manifeft-
 ing, thro* a long courfe of years, a ftrid
 care and fidelity in obferving their trea-
 ties, and  fulfilling  their other  engage-
 ments ; which there is the greateft realon
 to  conclude  would ftill  be  the  cafe,  in
 every  part of the continent, if  the fame
 equitable and  kind meafures were purfu-
 cd.
   Upon the whole, it is  a matter of un-
 doubted perfuafion, with impartial peo-
 ple, who have been converfant with Indi-
 ans, that if their dipofitions and natural
 powers are duly confidered, they will be
 found to be equally with  our own,  capa-
 ble of improvement in  knowledge and
 virtue, and  that  the apparent difference
 between us and them, is chiefly owing to
 our different ways  of  life, and  different
 ideas of what  is neceffary and delirable,
and the advantage of education, which
puts it in our  power  to  glofs over our
own conduct,*  however evil; and to  fet
theirs,  however defenfible,  in the moft
odious point of light.
                                Much
(    41    )
   Much of their blamable condud, now
complained  of,  is certainjy imputable to
a long continued train of fraudulent and
corrupt pradices, in our intercourfe with
(hem, especially, the  fatal  introdudion
of ftrong drink, of which they have  of-
ten complained, * and defired it  might
                                       not
  * At the treaty at Carlifle, in 1753, the Indi-
ans fay,   «• The Rum ruins us.   We  beg you
" would prevent its coming  in fuch quantities,
"  We defire it may be  forbidden, and  none fold
*• in the Indian country; but that if the Indians
" will have any, they may go  amongft the  In-
*' habitants,  and deal  with them.  When thefe
»« Whifkey traders come, they bring 30 or 40
*• Kegs,  and put them before us, and  make us
" drink, and get all the fkins that fhould go to
•• pay the debts we have contraded, for  goods
" bought of the fair trader; and by this means,
•« we mt only ruin ourfelves, but them too,
  " The wicked whifkey tellers, when  they have
«* once got the Indians in liquor, make them fell
«« their very clothes from their backs.  In fhort,
'« if this practice be continued, we muft be ine-
«< vitably ruined.  We moft earneftly, therefore,
'♦ befeech you to remedy it."
  We find an early record, in the Hiftory of New-
Jerfey. to the credit of the people of that  day,
That at  a conference they held  with the Indians,
where 8 Kings or Chiefs were prefent, the fpeaker
                                   exprefled
              (    42    )
not be brought amongft them, by which
inftead of allaying the ferment of cor-
rupt nature, by a good example, and the
good  inftrudion,  which  our  fuperior
knowledge would enable us to give them,
too many have been inftrumental in work-
ing  them up  to a ftate of diftradion,
which when it has burft forth in vengeance
upon ourfelves,  is  made  a pretence for
deftroying them, as tho' they were whol-
ly the aggreffors.
   That Indians  may be tempted or pro-
voked to the perpetration of  great evils,
by the intemperate  love and ufe of ftrong
                                 liquors,
expreff. d himfelf to the following effect:  «• Strong
«« liqur rs were fold to us by the Sweedi and  by
<« the Dutch; thefe  people  had  no eyes, they
«• did not fee it was hurtful to us; that it made
" us. mad.   We  know it is hurtful to us.   Ne-
«. verthelefs, if people will fell it  to usr we are
«« fo in love with it, that we cannot forbear; but
«' n< w there is a people come to live among!*  us,
«< that have eyes; they fee it to be for our hurt j
« they are willing to  deny themfelves the pr< fit,
« for our good.  Thefe people have eyes, we are
«« glad fuch a people are come, we muft put it
•• down by mutual confent.  We give thefe 4
»' belts cf  wampum-------to be a witnefs of tbii
«< agreement we  make with ynu;  and would
«« have you tell it to your children."
             (   43   )
liquors, is eafily conceived ; but whether,
they, who, to gratify the cravings of for-
did avarice,  furnifh them with the intox-
icating potion,  and then take advantage
of their fituation, to impofe upon them,
and tempt them to evil,  are not princi-
pally accountable, for the crimes they
commit, and their confequences, is not
a  query worthy  of their  moft  awful
confideratton.
   Had the  views of the inhabitants of
the  colonies, been more juft and  wife,
and their condud towards  the  Natives
regulated by a benevolence worthy of the
Chriftian Name,  every reasonable pur-
pofe of fettling in their country, might
have been fully  ac'complifhed, and they
at the fame  time become, generally, as
well civilized, as thofe  few who  were
under the care of the Moravians, at the
Mufkingum.
   The accounts  of  the  wicked policy
and cruelties exercifed by the Spaniards
upon  their Indians, we read with horror,
without confidermg how far ourfelves are
. in a degree guilty of fomething of the
 fame.
   How many peaceable Indians, refiding
 amongft us, have formerly  as well as
 lately, been murdered, with impunity,
                                    to
(.   44   )
to fatisfy the rage of angry  men, tho*
under the protection  of the law, with-
out any attonement being made. *
   What deftrudion both of Indians and
others, thro'  a  violent infringement  on
what they apprehended to be their rights.
What dreadful havock has the defire of
gain made amongft them, by the falc of
fpirituous liquors, &c. &c.  Surely this
muft be accounted for, when  an inqui-
fition for blood takes  place.   Indeed in-
tereft, as well as  duty, fhould induce the
people, in  general,  to  endeavour  the
bringing the Indians off from thofe falfe
habits and prejudices, which are as ob-
ftrudive to their own  happinefs,  as they
are dangerous to  ours.
  To what  degree of diftrefs, a few In-
dians can reduce  a country, let the An-
nals of New-England teftify, particular-
ly by the long and diftreffing wars with
the Eaftern Tribes, f who upon the mak-
                                  ing
  * At the Coneftogo Manor, Lancafter town,
and feveral otherf nftances.
  | D. Neal, fpeaking  of the cccafnn of thil
war with the Eaftern Indians, 2d. vol  page 24,
fays,  "  That  the  European*  cheated  the
              (    45    )
ing  a peace with them, were found to
be fo fmall a number, that it occafioned
the  celebrated  Cotton Mather, to take
up the following  lamentation :  "  Surely
" we had [mitten  the  whole army  of the
" Indians, that fought againfi us, twenty-
" three years ago, from  one end  of the
" land to  the other ; only there were left
" a few  wounded amongft  them  in  the
" eajl, and now they  have rifen  up, eve-
" ry man, and have fet the whole coun-
" try on fire.   Certainly a more humbling-
" matter cannot be related.   Moreover, is
'* it not  a very  humbling thing, that when
" about  an hundred Indians  dur/i begin a
" war upon all  thefe populous: colonies, an
" army of a thoufand Englifh raifed,  mufi
" not kill one of them all, but in/lead there-
" of, more of our foldiers perifhed by fick-
" nefs and hardjhips,  than we had ene-
'* mies in the world.   Our God has hum-
                                   " bled
Natives in  the moft open and bare-faced man-
ner imaginable,  and treated them  like  (laves.
The Indians" were not infenfible of this ufage;
but were afraid to do themfelves juftice, till they
beared that all New-England was involved  in a
bloody war, when they plainly told the Englifh,
they would bear their intuits no longer."
<    46    J
 " bled us. ^ Is  it  not a  very humbling
 " thing,  that when  the number of our cne-
 " mies afterwards incrcaftng, yet an hand-
 " f"l °f them fhould, for fo many  fum-
 " mcrs together,  continue our uneonquercd
 " fpollers, and put us to fuch vajl charges,
 " that if we would  have bought them for
 " an hundred pounds  a head, we fhould
 " have  made a faving  bargain of it.
 " Our God has humbled us." *
   What  an inftrudive  leffon  may  the
 rulers of government, and  the people,
 gather from  this pathetic lamentation ;
 how ought it to induce us diligently to la-
 bour for the maintenance of Peace and
 Friendfhip  with all  our   Indian  neigh-
 bours.
  How ought we to  look  up to God, the
 common  Father of the family of man-
 kind,  requefting he would enable us to
fow the feeds of Benevolence  and Mer-
 cy, carefully avoiding thofe of  War and1
 Deftrudion.f
                                      It
  * Hutchinfon, vol. 2, p. 4, fay«, "The province
of Maflachufett*, in the  courfe  of  fixry  )f-irs,
hath been a1 greater expence,  and hath loft more
of its inhab-tmts,  than  all  the other colonies
Hp'.-i the continent "
  f Ibid, pige 307.  " Evtry perfon alraoft,  in
                                     the
(   47    )
  It was, very probably,  the want  of
fuch a  care in the people of New-Eng-
land, particularly  in the lamentable  de-
ftruction of the  Pequot Indians,  tho'
perpetrated many years before, which
produced the grievous crop of calamity
and  diftrefs  here complained of;  for
however time and changes may  veil paft
tranfadions,  and remove  them from
fight, and the remembrance of men, yet
they will remain,  as prefent,  in the view
of Divine Purity ; and whilft unrepented
of, will, tho' covered,  as with dirt,  and
drofs,  remain as.engraven on  a rock,
which when the overflowing  ftream pre-
vails,  and that time of general inquiry,
comes,  when fecret things fhall be  re-
vealed, will appear as a teftimony againft
tranfgreffors.
   The Annals of New-England  informs
us, that the firft fettlers met with  kind
treatment  from the Natives, even when
they were few,  and fo fickly, that in the
firft winter,  one half  of  their  number
died.
                          Hutchinfon,
the two colonies, had  loft a relation or near
friend."
(   48    )
    Hutchinfon,  obferves,  "  That  the
 Ci  Natives /hewed courtefy to  the  Eng-
 " lifh,  at their firfl arrival;  were  bo*
 " fpitable, and made fuch  as  Would  eat
 "  their food,  welcome  to it, and readily
 "  inflruhed them in the planting and eul-
 "  tivating the  Indian Corn.   Some of the
 "  Engliflj who loft themfelves in the woods,
 " and  mufl  otherwife have pcrijhed with
 " famine,  they  relieved  and conduclcd
 "  home.'*
   It was about fifteen years after, when
 the fettlement  on the Connedicut river,
 was making  fpeedy advances towards the
 country of the Pequots, that differences
 arofe between thofe Indians and the Eng-
 lifh ; fome traders were killed, whether
 thro* the fault  of the Indians,  cr White
 People, is uncertain, as each blamed the*
 other;  the Indians, however,  flicwed a
 great defire  to maintain peace between
 them and the Englifh, for which purpofe
Neal obferves,  " They twice fent depu-
*«  ties   to Boflon, with  prefenis" which
might   with  patience and  forbearance,
thro' the bleffmg of God, have been im-
proved  ; but the I'nglifli infifting on the
delivery of the  perfons concerned, which
the Indians delaying to comply with, per-
haps  for want of  power, the Englifh
              (    49    )
** fell upon them, flew feveral, firing their
•'  wigwams, and fpoiling their corn, &c"
which enraged the Indians to fuch a  de-
gree, that, giving  up their endeavours
for peace, they attacked the fort on Con-
nedicut river; flew feveral perfons; and
carried away two maidens, who were af-
terwards returned.  Upon this,  the dif-
ferent New-England governments con-
cluded to unite  their forces, to  deftroy
thofe Indians ; which  was fo effedually
done, that Captain Underhill, who was
a principal Commander in that expediti-
on,  in his book intitled News from Ame*
rica9 page 2, tells us,   '* Ihofe  Indians,
"  the Pequots,  were drove Cut  of their
,c  country, and flain, by the fword, to the
"  number of ffteen hundred fouls,  in the
M  fpace of two months or lefs ; fo as their
41  country is fully fubdued, and fallen into
"  the hands of the Englifh."
   Hutchinfon fays,  " This was  the firfl
u  aclion between the Englifh and Indians ;
•'  the policy, as well as the morality of which
"  he obferves, may well be quefHoned.
And he adds, " The  Indians  have ever
««  Jhewn great barbarity  to  their Englifh
"  captives; the Englifh, in  too many in*
«*  fiances, have retaliated it.   This  has
J| wly enraged them the mere,   Be/ijes,
(   5°   )
 "  to deflroy women and children, for the
 "  barbarity of their hufbands, cannot be
 "  eafily ju/lified.   Many of the  captives
 •'  were Jent  to  Bermudas, and fold for
 " flaves.*' *
   This account of the deftrudion of the
 Pequot  Indians, is by no means intended
 as  a refledion  on the people  of New-
 England ;  fenfible, that it is  now long
 fmce many  amongft  them,  have been
 foremoft in furnifhing inftances  of the
 blefling  attendant on  the extenfion of
 friendly meafures, and a commendable
 care for  the civil and religious welfare of
 the Indians; as  well as they have of late
 years, fhewn an examplary  and  praife-
 worthy concern for doing  juftice to the
 oppreffed Africans:  but  only for  this
neceffary purpofe, that the  dreadful  ex-
perience of former times, may  be, as
inftrudive  cautions' in  our  future tranf-
                                adion*
  * Neat, page 25, obferves, relating to thofe
Pequot Indians, M That they made a noble ftand
againft the united force of New-England, and
would certainly  have defended  their country
agdknft the encroachment of the Englifh, if the
Nanaganfets, their  inveterate enemiet, had not
afliit*! the Englifh to dtAroy them.^
              (   5«    )
 adiqns with our  Indian neighbours, in
 the feveral fettlements now likely to  be
 made on lands belonging to  them, or
 claimed by them.   Indeed we cannot be
 too weighty  in confidering how  we lay
 our foundation for future happinefs or
 mifery;  as  our  Saviour's  declaration
 will be verified often,  in time,  and  cer-
 tainly in eternity: Thai  as  we fow  we
fhall  reap;   and  with that  meafure  we
 meet,  it fhall be  meafured to  us again;
 And  altho* the children are not accounta-
 ble for the iniquity of their fathers ; yet
 where the children are bafking and  re-
 joicing in the eafe and plenty they enjoy
 thro'  the fins of their fathers,  as is pe-
 culiarly the  cafe of thofe, who are  pof-
 fejTed of eftates procured by hard mea-
 fures towards Indians, or thro' the op-
 preffion of  the Negroes; thefe  as they
 rejoice in thofe poffeffions, which the
 SIN  has   produced,  cannot   exped
 other wife than,  to  be partakers  in the
 PLAGUE.
   Upon the  whole,   if the peace  and
 fafety of the  inhabitants of our wide ex-
tended frontiers j the lives and welfare of
fo many innocent and helplefs  people,
depends on the maintenance of a friend,
ly intercourfe  with our  Indian  neigh-
                             '  bours,
(    5*    )
bours,  what greater inftances of patriot-
ifm, of love to God and  mankind, can
be fhewn, than to promote, to the utmoft
of our  power,  not only  the civilization
of thefe uncultivated people, whom Pro-
vidence has, as it were, caft under our
care; but alfo their  eflablifhment,  in a
pious and virtuous life.   On the other
hand,  what greater injury can be done to
our country, than to diffufe, amongft the
thoughtlefs part of the people,  a difpofi-
tion, and promote  a condud,  tending
not only to deprive us of the advantage,
which  a friendly intercourfe with them
may produce ; *  but by raifing their en-
                                    mity
  * As it is expected that meafures are now tak-
ing to procure a free communication with the In-
dianCountry, whereby an extenfive trade with the
Natives will probably take place, and which, under
proper regulation, may prove very beneficial,  or
the contrary, if  left to the management of the
Traders, who hare generally no  other view but
gain.  Is it not an object worthy  the peculiar no-
tice of the different Legiffatures, that a fpecial
guard be had agaiaft the evil confequences which
will certainly attend, if an effectual reftraint is
not laid on the introduction of fpirituous liquors,
and other abufe,  amongft the Indians.
(   53    )
mity and  wrath,  expofe the country to
thofe grievous calamities,  which an In-
dian war often has, and will again, un-
doubtedly produce.
V
                 APPENDIX.
E  2
**
# sxxxxxxx>o<xxxxxxx><><><xxxxx#

3Q:xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxa#
APPENDIX.
R-^^^x^n art hiftoricalaccount of Ge*
    T   I  neral   Boquet's   expedition
II  againft  the Ohio  Indians,
g£.«.-«».«.cj£ publiflied under his infpedi-
on, in 1765, we meet with a lift of the
fighting men of the different  Indian na-
tions  of the northern  and fouthern di-
ftrids of North-America,  amounting to
fifty-fix thoufand, five hundred and eigh-
ty, confifting, chiefly, of  fuch Indians
as the French  were conneded with in
Canada and Louifiana.
   This account we are there told may be
depended upon, fo far as matters of this
kind  can be brought near the truth, be-
ing given by a French  trader  of confide-
rablc note, who had refided many years
amongft the Indians.
   The publifher  of that account, a per-
fon of reputation, now in this city, who
has for many years made matters relating
                                  to
(   56   )
to Indians his particular ftudy,  tells  us,
"  That fo large a number of fighting
men may ftartle us at firft fight; but the
account ieems no  where  exaggerated,
excepting  only that the Calawba  nation,
(mentioned in the lift to be 150 gun-men)
is now almoft extind.
  In fome nations which we are acquaint-
ed with, the account falls, even fhort of
their numbers; and fom« others  do not
appear to be mentioned at all, or at leaft
not by any name known to us:  Sueh for
inftance, are the lower Creeks, of whom
we have a lift, according to their  towns.
In this lift  their warriors or gun-men are
1180, and their inhabitants about 6000.
Thus  a comparative judgment  may be
formed of the nations  above-mentioned;
the number of  whofe inhabitants will (in
this proportion to the warriors,  viz. five
to one) be about 283000."
  From the above account of the num-
ber of Indians known to us, befides thofe
we are unacquainted with, how important
muft  it appear, to every fenfible  feeling
mind, that a friendly intercourfe be main*
tained with them,  as well from  our duty
as  Chriftians, as the  great advantage
which would arife from a well regulated
trade j and the dreadful diftrefs and fuf-
                             fe rings.,
(    S7    )
ferings, which a difagreement with them
might  bring  upon  fo  vaft a  numttfcr of
helplefs people,  on our  long  extended
frontiers. *             '
                                          In


  * To thofe who profefs that peaceable principle,
which implies a full reliance upon the Divine pro-
tection,  the number, or apparent power of any
adverfaries is of  little weight.
  But it is to be obferved,  thefe are quotations
from authors,  not of the fame peaceable profeffi -
on,  and are therefore confidered as proper to in-
form thofe readers, who, not grounded  in this
peaceable uniting principle,  are of contrary  Jenti'
menti, of the neceflity they are under, even as
prudent men,  upon  their own principles, to  conci-
liate the friendfhip of the natives.
  The common  aflertion,  that  if  friendly and
pacific meafures were alone purfued,  the proper-
ty of thofe fo difpofed, would become a prey to
every invader.    But this  aftertion cannot  be al-
lowed as valid, except we believe  that  " the
Lord hasforfaken the earth;"  Ezek. ix 19. but,
•« if the Lord reigneth," Pf. Ixliii. 1. and  " we
tear his name,   he  will be a  wall  of fire  round
about us."   Zach. ii. 5.
  And whatever fuffering  is permitted to  come
upon any,  on account of their  fidelity to what
they may think their duty requires, in the fupport of
that peaceable government of Chrift, theencreafe
of which, we are  told by the prophet Ifaiah,  there
is to he no end; as in  the cafe of the  Moravian In-
dians, it will be but as a  deliverance from their
troubles in  this world, and of a more exceeding
weight of glory, in that which is to come.
(    58   )
  In the hiftory of the Britifli dominions
in North-America,  already  mentioned,
id. vol. page 68, we meet with the fol-
lowing inftrudive obfervations:  " The
perpetual increafing generations  of Eu-
ropeans, in America,  may fupply num-
bers that muft in the end wear out  thefe
poor Indian inhabitants from their Coun-
try ; but we fhall pay dear, both in blood
and treafure, in the mean while,  for our
injuftice.
  Our frontiers, from the nature of ad-
vancing fettlements difperfed along the
branchings of the upper parts of our ri-
vers, and fcattered  in the difunited val-
leys, amidft the  mountains,  muft be al-
ways unguarded and defencelefs againfl
the incurfions of Indians.-----     The
farmer driven from his little cultured lot,
in the woods, is loft:  The Indian in the
woods,  is every where at home; every
bufh, every  thicket, is a camp to the In-
dian; from whence, at the very moment
when he is fure of his blow,  he  can rufh
upon his prey.  In fhort, our frontier fet-
tlements muft ever lie at the mercy of the
lavages; and a fettler  is the  natural prey
to an  Indian, whofe fole occupation is
war  and hunting.
                                   To
(   59    )
  To countries circumftanced as our co-
lonies are, an Indian is the moft dread-
ful of enemies.   For in a war with Indi-
ans, no force whatever, can defend  our
frontiers from being a conftant wretched
fcene of conflagrations, and of the moft
fhocking murders.   Whereas  on  the
contrary,  our   temporary  expeditions
againft  the  Indians, even if fuccefsful,
can do them little harm.   Every article
of their property is portable,  which they
always  carry with  them ;  and it is no
great matter of diftrefs to an Indian, to
be  driven from his dwelling  ground,
who finds a  home in the firft place he fits
down upon."
IINIS.
^

 
